See discussions, stats, and author profiles for this publication at: https://www.researchgate.net/publication/232808042

Urban Air Pollution Climates Throughout the World
Chapter in Issues in Environmental Science and Technology · January 2009
CITATIONS

READS

21

435

2 authors:
Ole Hertel.

Michael Goodsite Ph.D.

Aarhus University

University of Adelaide

278 PUBLICATIONS 6,531 CITATIONS

80 PUBLICATIONS 4,230 CITATIONS

SEE PROFILE

SEE PROFILE

Some of the authors of this publication are also working on these related projects:

http://www.elapseproject.eu/ View project

NCoE NORD-STAR View project

All content following this page was uploaded by Ole Hertel on 31 May 2014.

The user has requested enhancement of the downloaded file.

Urban Air Pollution Climates throughout
the World
OLE HERTEL* AND  GOODSITE

ABSTRACT
The extent of the urban area, the local emission density, and the temporal
pattern in the releases govern the local contribution to air pollution levels
in urban environments. However, meteorological conditions also heavily
aﬀect the actual pollution levels as they govern the dispersion conditions
as well as the transport in and out of the city area. The building obstacles
play a crucial role in causing generally high pollutant levels in the urban
environment, especially inside street canyons where the canyon vortex
ﬂow governs the pollution distribution. Of the pollutants dominating
urban air pollution climates, particulate pollution in general together with
gaseous and particulate polycyclic aromatic hydrocarbons (PAHs) and
heavy metals are those where further ﬁeld measurements, characterization
and laboratory studies are urgently needed in order to fully assess the
health impact on the urban population and provide the right basis for
future urban air pollution management.

1 Introduction
In addition to other adverse health eﬀects, air pollution is estimated to cause
about 2 million premature deaths worldwide annually.1 In this context particulate matter (PM) is generally believed to be the most hazardous of ambient
pollutants, and it has been estimated that reducing ambient air concentrations
of PM10 from 70 to 20 mg m3 would lower the number of air quality related
deaths by approximately 15%.1 More than half of the world’s population reside
Issues in Environmental Science and Technology, 28
Air Quality in Urban Environments
Edited by R.E. Hester and R.M. Harrison
r Royal Society of Chemistry 2009
Published by the Royal Society of Chemistry, www.rsc.org

1

2

Ole Hertel and  Goodsite
2

in cities, where the highest air pollution exposure3 and associated negative
health impact take place. Furthermore, the projections for the next 50 years
indicate that the worldwide urban population will increase by two thirds.2
Urban air pollution has been increasing in major cities, especially those found
in developing countries (such as in: Brazil, Russia, India, Indonesia and China)
as a result of rapid urbanisation. The cost to society of the associated health
eﬀects is signiﬁcant and has been estimated to be approximately 2% of
the Gross Domestic Product (GDP) in developed countries and 5% of GDP
in developing countries (www.unep.org/urban_environment/issues/urban_
air.asp). There may also be associated losses in productivity.4

1.1

Emission and Formation of Urban Air Pollution

Urban air pollution arises from the competition between emission processes
which increase pollutant concentrations, and dispersion, advection and
deposition processes that reduce and remove them. This chapter describes the
diﬀerences in local urban pollutant levels between cities worldwide, and outlines how these diﬀerences in pollution levels reﬂect diﬀerences in emission
densities and emission patterns, but also in pollutant dispersion and removal
processes. The impact on pollution levels of the dispersion and removal processes are governed by the local meteorological conditions, which also vary
heavily with the physical location of the city. Air pollution concentrations in an
urban environment are naturally the result of local emissions as well as contributions from pollution transport from more remote sources (see Figure 1).
The size of the city domain and the density of pollutant emissions govern the
local contribution to urban air pollution.5 Naturally, the temporal pattern in
urban air pollution levels is a function of variations in the local releases, but just

Concentration

Street increment

City increment

Regional
Distance
City area

Figure 1

A schematic illustration of the air pollutant contribution from regional
transport, the city area and the street traﬃc. The relative magnitude of the
various contributions depends on the considered pollutant and the actual
dispersion conditions (governed by the meteorology).

Urban Air Pollution Climates throughout the World

3

as important are the variations in the meteorological parameters that govern
the dispersion and the pollutant transport in and out of the city.
Besides the inﬂuence from temporal variations in emissions and meteorology,
the emission release height also plays an important role. Air pollution emitted
from a high release height will in many cases be transported out of the urban
area before being dispersed down to ground level; depending on the size of the
urban domain. Urban industries, power plants and other sources for which the
releases come from tall chimneys, contribute therefore only rarely to the local
ground level air pollutant concentrations inside the urban area. These pollutant
sources contribute primarily to the more regional air pollution.
Pollutant emissions related to vehicular transport, local domestic heating and
smaller industries have low release heights [less than 10 m above ground level
(a.g.l.)]. These releases are not diluted as eﬃciently as generally the case for
emissions from tall release heights (more than 20 m a.g.l.). The contribution
from ‘‘low’’ sources therefore often dominates the pollutant concentrations at
ground level inside the urban area. A steady growth in vehicular transport and
centralization of domestic heating have made road traﬃc the most important
source of urban air pollution in many countries,6 including most industrialized
nations.
In respect to local contribution from diﬀerent sectors there are generally
signiﬁcant diﬀerences between developed and developing countries. A comparison of two so-called mega-cities (Beijing and Paris) showed that aerosol
particles and volatile organic compounds (VOCs) have a complex and multicombustion source in Beijing, whereas a single traﬃc pollution source completely dominates the urban atmospheric environment in Paris.7
Indoor air quality is a major health concern. In the developing countries,
emissions from household use of fossil fuels in the year 2000 was estimated
to account for 1.6 million deaths, mainly among women and children in the
poorest countries.8
In the present paper we focus on ambient air quality and related impact on
human health. The actual ambient air pollutant load greatly varies from one
city to another, but, generally, major urban areas throughout the world have
poor air quality, and, among these, the cities in the developing countries face
the greatest challenges. WHO has compiled a survey on typical ranges in
ambient air concentrations of four indicator pollutants, which are summarized
in Table 1.

1.2

Urban Pollution Levels and Indicators

The highest urban air concentrations of the classic pollutants like PM10 and
SO2 are found in Africa, Asia and Latin America, whereas the highest levels of
secondary pollutants like O3 and NO2 are observed in Latin America and in
some of the larger cities and urban air sheds in the developed countries. The
environmental and human health impacts are particularly severe in cities of
about 10 million or more inhabitants – also known as mega-cities.9 Urban air

4

Table 1

Ole Hertel and  Goodsite

Ranges in annual average urban ambient air concentrations (mg m3)
of PM10, NO2, SO2 and 1 hour average maximum concentrations of
O3 for diﬀerent regions, based on a selection of urban data.1
Annual average concentrations

Region

PM10

NO2

SO2

1 h max concentration
O3

Africa
Asia
Australia/New Zealand
Canada/United States
Europe
Latin America

40–150
35–220
28–127
20–60
20–70
30–129

35–65
20–75
11–28
35–70
18–57
30–82

10–100
6–65
3–17
9–35
8–36
40–70

120–300
100–250
120–310
150–380
150–350
200–600

pollution has become one of the main environmental concerns in Asia, and
especially in China where the pollution load in mega-cities like Beijing,
Shanghai, Guangzhou, Shenzhen and Hong Kong is substantial. In these
cities, between 10 and 30% of days exceed the so-called Grade-II national air
quality standards10 by a factor of three to ﬁve times that of the WHO AQG (air
quality grade). These cities have experienced a 10% growth in traﬃc each year
over the last 5 to 6 years and, even with enhanced emission controls, NO2
and CO concentrations have remained almost constant over the same period of
time.
Use of air quality indices (AQIs) are common tools in environmental management. A description of widely used indices and how they are expressed
mathematically is given in Gurjar et al.11 AQIs can be designed to handle single
or multi pollutants and may be used for comparing the loads in diﬀerent cities
or for describing the current load in relation to average loads or air quality
standards and target values. In a multi component AQI (they applied the term
MPI) ranging over mega-cities throughout the world, the highest MPI values
were found for Dhaka, Beijing, Cairo and Karachi with values about double
those of Delhi, Shanghai and Moscow11 (Figure 2).

2 Sources in the Vicinity of the City
Airports are usually located in the vicinity of larger cities and often mentioned
as potential sources of high pollution loads in the urban areas. In recent years,
several studies have thus been carried out to determine the potential impact of
airport emissions. These studies generally point at an inﬂuence from the road
traﬃc going to and from the airport, whereas the impact of aircraft emissions
has been found to be very limited. In a study carried out in Frankfurt Airport,
signals from speciﬁc aircraft emissions generally could not be identiﬁed,
whereas emissions from vehicle traﬃc on surrounding motorways had measurable impact on the air quality.12 A study from Munich Airport had similar
ﬁndings.13 A study inside Heathrow Airport has shown that between 5 and

5

Urban Air Pollution Climates throughout the World
Tokyo
New York
São Paulo
Mumbai
Kolkata
Shanghai
Buenos Aires
Delhi
Los Angeles
Osaka-Kobe
Jakarta
Beijing
Rio de Janeiro
Cairo
Dhaka
Moscow
Karachi
-2.5

Figure 2

-1.5

-0.5

0.5

1.5

2.5

Mega-cities pollution indices (MPI) based on measurements of the classical
air pollutants and aggregated into an index for total pollution level (multi
pollutant). The plot is reproduced from Gurjar et al.11

30% of the local NOx contribution is related to aircraft, whereas the remaining
95 to 70% is from road traﬃc.14
A recent study has indicated that ship traﬃc is responsible for about 60,000
lung cancer and cardiopulmonary deaths annually,15 but this outcome is linked
to the contribution from ship emissions to the background PM load and not
particularly related to the urban air quality. Harbours may be a local source
contributing to urban pollution, but studies indicate that local road traﬃc often
dominates the contribution from harbours. A study in the harbour of Aberdeen
thus showed a gradient of increasing NO2 and soot concentrations from the
harbour towards the city centre,16 indicating the contribution from the harbour
had very limited impact on the local air quality in comparison with the emissions taking place in the urban environment.
Wood combustion in households is a growing concern in areas with many
wood stoves that have relatively high local emissions of PM in comparison
with other anthropogenic pollution sources. Investigations of wood combustion and air quality in developed countries like New Zealand,17 Sweden,18
USA19,20 and Denmark21 have documented that residential wood combustion
may signiﬁcantly elevate the local PM concentrations in outdoor air. As an
example, emission inventories for Denmark point at wood combustion as the
largest anthropogenic source of primary particle emissions.

3 Impact of the Geography, Topography and Meteorology
3.1

Geography

The location of the city has signiﬁcant impact on the dispersion conditions,
mainly since it aﬀects the local meteorological conditions. The classical

6

Ole Hertel and  Goodsite

example is Los Angeles situated in a valley with frequent stagnant conditions
during temperature inversions. The stagnant conditions lead generally to low
wind speeds, and little air exchange between the valley and the surrounding
areas. Hot and sunny climate and high emissions from traﬃc, industry and
domestic heating makes the valley act like a large pollutant reaction chamber.
This leads to high concentrations of photochemical products like ozone,
nitrogen dioxide and peroxy acetyl nitrate (PAN).
A comparison of nitrogen oxide (NOx) levels in the street Via Senato in
Milan, Italy and the street Jagtvej in Copenhagen, Denmark showed similar
concentrations at the two sites despite much higher traﬃc in the street of
Copenhagen.22 It was shown mainly to be a result of generally lower wind
speeds in Milan compared with Copenhagen. High wind speeds and neutral
conditions prevail in Copenhagen, whereas low wind speeds and stable or near
stable conditions are frequent in Milan. Copenhagen has a cold coastal climate
whereas Milan has a warm sub-tropical climate and the local wind conditions
are furthermore aﬀected by the location inside the Po Valley.

3.2

Topography

Some cities have characteristic wind systems as a result of local topography.
An example of such eﬀects is the rising air over a warm mountain side during
daytime often leading to local formation of clouds and release of precipitation.
During night the system turns around and the cooling of the air in the
mountain valley leads to stable conditions that may cause local air pollution
problems. The impact of Katabatic winds is another example, which aﬀects
cities along the Norwegian coast. The Katabatic winds are formed when cold
air masses move down-slope (Katabatic is Greek for moving down hill) and
meeting the colder snow and glacier covered areas, which then cool the air mass
further, before the air ﬂoats out through a narrow cleft at the bottom of the hill.
Usually the impact on air pollutant concentrations is moderate, but they may
lead for example to high levels of local dust. Yet another example is the warm
and dry Foehn wind formed on the back-side of a mountain chain, e.g. on the
north side of the Alps. When the wind is forced over the mountain, the air is
cooled and releases moisture. The air subsequently becomes warmer when it is
moving down-hill again. This system may then form an inversion and, e.g.
reduce dispersion of local air pollutants.

3.3

Meteorology

The ambient temperature in the urban atmosphere of larger cities is generally a
couple of degrees Celsius higher than that found in the surrounding rural areas.
This feature is termed the urban heat island eﬀect,23 and the explanation is that
the city has a smaller albedo and therefore absorbs more energy compared with
the surrounding rural areas. There is in addition a high consumption of energy
inside the city, as a result of domestic heating and intense road traﬃc, which

Urban Air Pollution Climates throughout the World

7

again contributes to release of heat. Finally, the buildings and other urban
constructions form a shield for the wind, and this shielding leads to less cooling
of the surfaces inside the city. Since the buildings act as heat reservoirs, the city
has furthermore a less pronounced diurnal temperature variation compared
with the rural area.
In calm weather, an urban circulation cell may be formed by warm air rising
from the city. Some distance away, this heated air sinks and returns to the city
at a low altitude. A similar phenomenon is known in coastal regions, where a
sea breeze may be formed as a result of the temperature diﬀerence between the
sea and land surfaces. A study in London showed that the heat island circulation over the city means that the wind speed is never below about 1 m s1
(ref. 24). This study shows that the heat island eﬀect is very important during
low wind speed conditions in London where it may dominate the dispersion
and thereby be limiting for the highest local air pollution concentrations,
and this eﬀect may thereby be the limiting factor for the highest pollution
concentrations in the urban environment.

4 Pollutant Dispersion in Urban Streets (see also chapter by
Salmond and McKendry)
Traﬃcked streets are air pollution hot spots in the urban environment (Figure
1). The concentration inside the urban street may be considered as the result of
two contributions, one from emissions from the local traﬃc in the street itself
and one from background pollution entering the street canyon from above roof
level:25
c ¼ cb þ cs
where c is the concentration in the street, cb the urban background contribution
and cs the contribution from traﬃc inside the street itself. The background
contribution furthermore arises from two contributions; the ﬁrst of these is the
contribution from nearby sources in the urban area (typically this will mainly
be traﬃc in surrounding streets), and the other contribution consists of regional
(sources within a distance of a few hundred km) and long range transported
(sources placed up to thousands of km away) pollution.
Naturally, the pollutant levels in the urban streets are strongly aﬀected by
traﬃc emissions taking place inside the street itself. However, the concentration
level and the distribution of air pollution inside the street are to a large extent
governed by the surrounding physical conditions. These physical conditions
heavily aﬀect the wind speed and especially the wind direction inside the
street.25 The special airﬂow generated inside the streets and around building
obstacles may result in very diﬀerent concentration levels at diﬀerent locations
in the street. The classical example is the street canyon vortex ﬂow (Figure 3),
which physically governs the pollutant distribution inside the street canyon.
The street canyon is characterised by the presence of tall buildings on both sides

8

Ole Hertel and  Goodsite
wind
Background pollution

Recirculated pollution

Leeward

Figure 3

Direct emission

Windward

Illustration of the ﬂow and dispersion inside a street canyon. In the situation
shown, the wind above roof level is blowing perpendicular to the street.
Inside the street canyon a vortex is created, and the wind direction at street
level is opposite to the wind direction above roof level. Pronounced diﬀerences (they may be up to a factor of 10) in air pollution concentrations on
the two pavements is the result of these ﬂows.

of the street. Within the vortex ﬂow relatively clean air from rooftop height is
drawn down at the windward face of the street, across the road at street level, in
the reverse of the wind direction at roof top, bringing pollutants in the road to
the leeward face of the canyon. This results in pollution concentrations up to 10
times higher on the leeward side compared with the windward side of the street.

5 Nitrogen Dioxide Pollution in Urban Areas (see also chapter
by Bloss)
Residence time for an air packet in the vicinity of an urban street is usually of
the order of seconds to a few minutes,25 depending on the street topography,
and therefore only very fast chemical conversions have time to take place.
For example the chemistry of nitrogen oxides [NOx: the sum of nitrogen
monoxide (NO) and nitrogen dioxide (NO2)] in urban streets may be described
by only two reactions: the reaction between ozone (O3) and NO forming NO2,
and the photo dissociation of NO2:26
NO þ O3 ! NO2

ð1Þ

NO2 þ hn ! NO þ Oð3 PÞ

O 3 P þ O2 ! O3

ð2Þ
ð3Þ

O(3P) is ground state atomic oxygen. Reaction (3) is very fast, and for most
practical applications it may be disregarded. The products of reaction (2) may
thus be considered to be NO and O3. NOx is therefore mainly emitted as NO
and to a lesser extent, NO2.

Urban Air Pollution Climates throughout the World

9

Long-term exposure to elevated NO2 levels may decrease lung function and
increase the risk of respiratory symptoms such as acute bronchitis, cough and
phlegm, particularly in children,27 whereas NO at current ambient air concentrations is considered to be harmless.
Previously, the fraction of NOx directly emitted as NO2 was only about 5 to
10% in countries with a small fraction of diesel engines. Due to the use of
catalytic converters and an increasing number of diesel engines with high
fraction of NO2 in the exhaust, this value may in some regions be up to as much
as 40%.28 This extremely simple chemical mechanism of two reactions and a
direct emission describes very well the concentrations of NO2 inside urban
streets,26 and e.g. for Northern European cities it may also be applied for
describing NO2 concentrations in urban background air.5
The use of catalytic converters has in recent years led to a signiﬁcant
reduction in NOx concentrations in urban streets of many industrialised
countries. However, for several reasons NO2 levels have not followed the same
trends (Figure 4). Part of the explanation is the chemical conversion of NO to
NO2 in the reaction with O3, but another explanation is an increased fraction of
NO2 in the NOx emission from vehicles with catalytic converters. Despite the
overall reduction in NOx emissions this is contributing to elevated NO2 concentrations. Prognoses for the development in NO2 concentrations in Denmark
indicate that the future exhaust standards for road traﬃc vehicles will solve the
current problems of complying with EU limit values. It is therefore important
that similar emission restrictions take place in developing countries in the
future in order to solve the problem of exposure of the population to elevated
NO2 levels here also.

6 Particle Pollution in Urban Areas
Ambient urban air contains a complex mixture of particles of varying sizes and
chemical composition.29–33 The size is crucial for the atmospheric fate34 as well
as the human health impact, since it governs the particles’ atmospheric behaviour as well as their deposition in the human respiratory system.35 Particles
in ambient air typically appear in three rather distinct size classes (or modes)
usually termed ultraﬁne (diameter: 0.01–0.1 mm or 10–100 nm), ﬁne (diameter:
0.l–2.5 mm) and coarse (diameter: 42.5 mm) mode particles (Figure 5).

6.1

Particle Mass Concentrations

Only the mass concentration of particles o10 mm in aerodynamic diameter
(PM10) is generally used as an indicator for suspended particulate matter
(e.g. regulated in EU directives) and routinely measured at many locations
throughout the world. Particle mass is dominated by particles 40.1 mm in
diameter. The particles that appear in traﬃc exhaust are found mainly in
the ultraﬁne fraction and include elemental carbon (EC) as well as organic
carbon (OC).36 These particles contribute considerably to the PM number

10

Ole Hertel and  Goodsite
Jagtvej, Copenhagen
Banegaarsgade, Aarhus
Vesterbro, Aalborg

H.C.A. Boulevard, Cph
Albanigade, Odense

300

µg(NO2)/m3

250
200
150
100
50

98

00

02

04

98

00

02

04

96

94

92

90

88

86

84

82

0

70
60
µg(NO2)/m3

50
40
30
20
10

Figure 4

96

94

92

90

88

86

84

82

0

The measured trend in annual mean concentrations of NOx and NO2 [both
shown in mg(NO2)/m3] at the street stations in the largest Danish cities:
Copenhagen, Aarhus, Odense and Aalborg. Upper plot shows NOx and
lower plot the NO2. The plots include measurements from the time period
1982 to 2005, and illustrate the decrease in NO concentrations that results
from increasing number of vehicles with catalytic converters in the Danish
car parks, but also that this decrease is not reﬂected in the NO2 concentrations that have remained more or less constant during this time
period.63

concentrations but only little to the PM mass. There are health studies
that show relationships between both acute and long-term health eﬀects and
ultraﬁne particles (particle sizes o0.1 mm),37 but other studies are less conclusive concerning health eﬀects of ultraﬁne particles (expressed as particle
number concentrations). Although ultraﬁne particles give a minor contribution
to mass concentrations, they represent most of the particles in terms of number
concentration. Most studies of health eﬀects of ambient air particles have been
related to particle mass, but even here the mechanisms are not fully understood
and the need for more studies has been underlined.38

11

Urban Air Pollution Climates throughout the World
Number
Mass

Condensates &
other primary
particles (mainly
traffic)

Secondary particles
(long range transport)

Soot (traffic)

0.001

0.01

0.1

coarse
(wear of tires, road
construction work &
natural sources)

Dust from brakes
(traffic)
1

10

100 µm

Nano particles
Ultrafine particles
PM2.5 (fine particles)
PM10

Figure 5

The typical size distribution of particles in urban air given in both mass and
number concentration. The horizontal axis is the particle diameter in mm.
The full line is mass distribution, dominated by the coarse and secondary
particles. The dashed line is the number distribution, dominated by ultraﬁne
particles. Note that one particle with a diameter of 10 mm has the same
weight as 1 billion particles with a diameter of 0.01 mm.64

In busy streets, a signiﬁcant fraction of the particle pollution originates from
traﬃc.39 The direct emission from car exhaust contains particles formed inside
the engine as well as in the air just after the exhaust pipe. The latter depends on
the sulfur content in the fuel; studies have shown that reducing the sulfur
content in diesel signiﬁcantly reduces the particle number concentrations in
urban streets. The directly emitted particles are found mainly in the ultraﬁne
particle fraction. However, traﬃc also contributes to mechanically formed
particles in the ﬁne and especially the coarse fraction. The particles in the coarse
fraction are produced from wear of tyres and road surface material as well as
re-suspended dust. The particles from the brakes contribute similar amounts to
the ﬁne and the coarse fraction.
For particle mass (PM10), long-range transport is usually the dominating source
for regional background levels. Danish studies have shown that less than 10% of
the urban PM10 originate from local urban sources.39 For particle numbers as
well as NOx a much larger diﬀerence between rural, urban and curb side levels
is observed, indicating a large contribution from local traﬃc sources (Figure 6).

6.2

Particle Number Concentrations

A striking feature of urban particles is the often very high correlation between
concentrations of NOx and total particle number, indicating that both

12
Concentration relative to urban background (=100)

Ole Hertel and  Goodsite
600
500
400

Curb side
urban background
near-city location
rural background

300
200
100
80
60
40
20
0
ToN

Figure 6

PM10

NOx

Comparison of average concentrations of total particle number (ToN),
particle mass (PM10) and NOx at rural, near-city, urban and curb side stations relative to urban background levels in the Copenhagen area. The
concentration bars are stacked so that only the additional contributions are
marked with the pattern shown in the legend. Note that the scale of the
vertical axis changes at 100. Adapted from Ketzel et al.39

compounds originate from the same (traﬃc) source (one study39 found R
40.9). They are emitted in a similar ratio (particle number : NOx) from the
diﬀerent traﬃc categories, i.e. high NOx emitters (diesel vehicles, especially
heavy-duty vehicles) are also high particle emitters (when these are expressed
in particle number concentrations).40 Model calculations such as those with the
Danish Operational Street Pollution Model (OSPM)41 have been shown to
reproduce well the observed particle number, when treating particles as inert
tracers (disregarding transformation and loss processes).42 The particle emission factors depend on ambient temperature with higher emissions at lower
temperatures, which is accounted for in the simulations.43
Long-range transport contributes signiﬁcantly to ﬁne fraction particles and
leads to the main part of particulate sulfate and ammonium and a large part of
particulate nitrate. These secondary particles are formed from anthropogenic
sulfur dioxide (SO2), ammonia (NH3) and NOx emissions,44 and often constitute more than 30% of the PM10. Another part of the particulate nitrate
appears in the coarse fraction, which also contains contributions from sea spray
and re-suspended dust (including road dust)45,46 that has a relatively large mass
and quickly deposits by gravitational settling. Coarse particles, therefore, have
a short lifetime in the atmosphere compared with ﬁne particles. Combustion in
wood stoves is a source of particle pollution, which contributes about 90% of
the total particle emissions attributed to domestic heating in Denmark. As an
example, road traﬃc and use of wood stoves are the largest Danish sources of

Urban Air Pollution Climates throughout the World

13

particle exposure of the population, due to the low release height and because
the emissions take place where people live. The particles emitted from wood
stove combustion are soot particles with high contents of polycyclic aromatic
hydrocarbons (PAH).

6.3

Importance of Measurement Location

People in temperate climates spend a signiﬁcant part of their time indoors.
Exposure to air pollution in the home is thus an important fraction of their
overall exposure. A Danish study in an uninhabited apartment in central
Copenhagen revealed that particle pollution inside the apartment was to some
extent linked to the activity level of the neighbouring apartments.47 This
indicates that sources in the neighbouring environment must also be considered
in the analysis of overall exposure.
When comparing and analysing observed levels of PM in diﬀerent cities one
must take into account that the location of the monitoring stations may be very
diﬀerent, and there is a risk of comparing sites in the vicinity of large pollution
sources with sites at some distance from local sources.

6.4

Contribution from Natural Processes

Data collected in a WHO study (Figure 7), indicate that PM10 concentrations in
Asia and Latin America are higher than are observed in Europe and North
America.1 The highest particle levels are observed in Asia and are attributed to
forest ﬁres, poor fuel quality and aeolian (windblown) dust. Wind erosion
originating especially in the deserts of Mongolia and China contributes to the
general level of PM in the region.

7 Polycyclic Aromatic Hydrocarbons (PAH) in Urban Areas
7.1

Sources and Emissions

Polycyclic aromatic hydrocarbons are a group of chemicals that are formed
during incomplete burning of coal, oil, gas, wood, garbage, or other organic
substances, such as tobacco and charbroiled meat. There are more than 100
diﬀerent PAHs. PAHs generally occur as complex mixtures (i.e. as part of
combustion products such as soot), not as single compounds. They usually
occur adventitiously, but they can be manufactured as individual compounds
for research purposes; however, not as the mixture found in combustion products. They can also be found in materials such as crude oil, coal, coal tar pitch,
creosote, and rooﬁng tar. A few PAHs are used in medicines and in the production of dyes, plastics, and pesticides. Others are contained in asphalt used in
road construction.
Given the numerous sources of emissions of combustion products in urban
(especially in developing countries) areas, PAHs are generally considered

Figure 7

0

40

80

120

160

200

240
Latin America
Africa

Interim target-2

Europe

Interim target-3

Annual average PM10 concentrations in selected cities worldwide

Interim target-1
Air Quality Guidelines

PM10 concentrations (mg m3) in selected large cities throughout the world. The plot has been derived on basis of WHO (2006).1 The
WHO Air Quality Guideline (AQG) [shown in the ﬁgure] deﬁned at the lowest level at which total, cardiopulmonary and lung cancer
mortality has been shown to increase with more than 95% conﬁdence in response to long-term exposure. Shown also are the WHO
interim target values 1 to 3.

Latin A

Asia

Karachi
New Delhi
Katmandu
Dhaka
Calcuta
Shanghai
Beijing
Gangzhou
Ho Chi Min City
Mumbai
Colombo
Busan
Seoul
Manila
Bangkok
Taipei
Hong Kong
Tokyo
Lima
Arequipa
Meddelin
Fortaleza
Santiago
Bogotá
Cochabamba
San Salvador
Guatemala City
Havana
Mexico City
Quito
Rio de Janeiro
La Paz
Sáo Paulo
San Juan
Belo Horizonte
Cairo
Vereeniging
Johannesburg
Cape Town
Praque
Turin
Bucharest
Barcelona
Milan
Rome
Cracow
Berlin
Erfurt
Oslo
Palermo
Seville
Bologna
Helsinki
Budapest
Florence
Hamburg
Vienna
Warsaw
Munich
Amsterdam
Cologne
Geneva
Basel
Zurich
Copenhagen
London
Athens
Leeds
Brussels
Stockholm
San Diego
St. Louis
Los Angeles
Knoxville
Houston
Pittburg
Dallas
Memphis
Oklahoma City
Washington DC
New York
Seattle

14

Ole Hertel and  Goodsite

Urban Air Pollution Climates throughout the World

15

ubiquitous in the atmospheric environment and the urban environment in
general. They occur in air, either attached to dust particles or as solids in airborne soil or sediment. PAHs are also a common product of combustion from
common sources such as motor vehicles, and other gas-burning engines, woodburning stoves and furnaces, cigarette smoke, industrial smoke or soot, and
charcoal-broiled foods.48,49 This is of great concern due to the mutagenic50 and
carcinogenic51 properties of PAHs. PAHs of three or more benzene rings have a
low vapour pressure and low solubility in water. Therefore they are present in
ambient air both as gaseous compounds and as material adsorbed on particles.
Lighter PAHs are accordingly almost always observed in gas phase, whereas
heavier PAHs are generally observed on particles. The United States Agency
for Toxic Substances (ATSDR, 1995) has listed 17 PAHs as of priority concern
with respect to their toxicological proﬁle. PAHs have been studied in urban and
other areas and appear to represent a fraction of a percent of the ambient
particle mass.52 However, there are compelling arguments that the previously
commonly employed measurement techniques produced artefacts and despite
their toxicological proﬁle, no country has mandatory guidelines with respect to
ambient air quality standards.53 The reader is referred to a recent review paper
for greater detail and the current state of the art.53
Commercial production has been found not to be a signiﬁcant source of
PAHs in the environment.54 The primary sources of many PAHs in ambient air
is the incomplete combustion of wood and other fuels.55 Natural sources
include volcanoes, forest ﬁres, crude oil, and shale oil. Only three of the 7 PAHs
included in the ATSDR proﬁles are produced commercially in the United
States in quantities greater than research level: acenaphthene, acenaphthylene,
and anthracene.49 Studies should be conducted to see if commercial production
(accounting for a products’ total life cycle) is a signiﬁcant source of PAHs to
the urban environment.

7.2

Sampling Artefacts

In order to reduce the risk of sampling artefacts,52 in the spring of 2003 the
Mexico City Metropolitan Area (MCMA) campaign employed three independent methods to measure particle-bound PAHs.56,57 They found peak
concentrations of PAHs on the order of 120 ng m3 during the morning rush
hour. Accordingly in urban areas, depending on the fuel sources of the vehicles
and the use of catalytic converters, motor vehicle traﬃc is a signiﬁcant source
of PAHs with the balance of the remainder from trash and biomass burning.
As an example, one speciﬁc study found that 20% of the vehicles were
accounting for 50% of the PAH emissions.58 Like other atmospheric gaseous
and particulate constituents, PAHs are removed from the atmosphere by wet or
dry deposition and may also be converted or degraded in heterogeneous processes. A very rapid decay of surface PAHs in the morning photochemistry has
been reported.52 However, in this study, it could not be ruled out that surfactants coating the particles may have aﬀected the sensitivity of the applied
instrument. This is another example of the complexity of PAH measurements.

16

Ole Hertel and  Goodsite

There may be signiﬁcant concentrations of very toxic and very reactive PAHs
in the MCMA atmosphere that are missed due to ﬁlter reaction artefacts.57

7.3

Long Range Transport

Long range transport of PAHs are a concern. PAHs are designated as one
of the persistent toxic substances in central and northeast Asia under the
Stockholm Convention (UNEP, 2002). It has been demonstrated that transformation processes can lead to PAHs which are more toxic than their precursors.56 Processes describing the transformation and fate of PAHs in the
urban environment are needed to further quantify the magnitude of the health
risks associated with this toxic pollutant source.
One study has analysed the source apportionment of particulate PAHs at
Seoul, Korea, during a measurement campaign between August 2002 and
December 2003,59 by applying the US EPA (2004) chemical mass balance
(CMB) model; as Seoul is in the atmospheric footprint of major coal burning
industries and power plants of both China and Japan, as well as contributing
itself to the Northeast Asia particle footprint. In Seoul, similar to MCMA,
gasoline and diesel vehicles accounted for 31% of the measured PAHs, i.e. the
major sources. Daily and seasonal variations were noted and attributed to
diﬀerences in biomass burning and coal (heating) with a 19% diﬀerence in the
total concentrations observed between fall (63%) and winter (82%). The
sources had an inverse proﬁle away from the city, which the authors attribute
via source analysis to long range transport of atmospheric pollutant (LRTAP)
PAHs and their precursors from sources in China or North Korea.

7.4

Future Requirements

The Korean study, as well as the other studies discussed above, document the
urgent need for better understanding of PAHs in the urban atmosphere as
well as their transformation, transport and conversion. Although air quality of
mega-cities and urban areas fall within the jurisdiction of local governments, the
studies provide compelling evidence that eﬀorts at international levels to regulate LRTAP must speciﬁcally look at PAHs and their precursors. This will
require an international, strategic joint eﬀort amongst Asia, Europe and North
America to investigate these complicated mechanisms, and analyse the data.
There are often many air quality monitoring stations (198 in Korea) in countries
collecting data, but for PAHs, they are not well established, and levels are
reported in only a few studies, and these are usually from campaigns that predate the publications by years, owing to the complexity of analysing the data.

8 Trace Elements, including Heavy Metals in Urban Areas
Trace elements including heavy metals (HM) are ubiquitous in the atmosphere
of urban areas and many are classiﬁed as Hazardous Air Pollutants (HAP).

Urban Air Pollution Climates throughout the World

17

They represent serious environmental and health risks and are especially of
concern in industrial and urban climates, with mega-cities in developing nations
being the obvious sites of concern for populations at risk for trace element
exposure. One study has provided trends and levels of trace metals in three
Danish cities as well as at background sites.60 The levels reported are less than
literature values for mega-cities, as expected, but in many cases the trends
are similar. More studies need to be accomplished with respect to trends in
developing and mega-cities.

8.1

Heavy Metals

Western nations have tightened and continue to restrict emissions of such trace
elements as mercury, but despite decades of history of eﬀorts to regulate trace
metals they still represent a real and pressing health and environmental hazard
in the US (US EPA, 2006) and certainly in other western nations and other
countries as well. Humans are exposed to metals via ambient air inhalation, and
consuming contaminated food or water, as well as, in the case of lead and
children, chewing on lead painted toys, and exposure from walls or furniture.
Several metals aside from mercury and lead are classiﬁed by the United
States Clean Air Act as HAPs: chromium, manganese, nickel, and cadmium.
The United States Environmental Protection Agency (US EPA) lists many
trace metals as among the worst urban air toxics (www.epa.gov/ttn/atw/nata/
34poll.html, 28 November, 2008).

8.2

Trace Elements

Trace elements and metals were of great concern in western cities prior to lead
being banned as an anti-knock agent in gasoline in the mid 70s, as well as other
regulations regarding the use of lead in, for example, house paints. The
observed high levels and eﬀects have led to extensive monitoring with consequential regulations and international agreements that have greatly reduced
the concentrations.
The sources of emission into the urban atmosphere of commonly measured
trace elements: Be, Co, Hg, Mo, Ni, Sb, Se, Sn, and V, with smaller concentrations of As, Cr, Cu, Mn, and Zn, are primarily human activities, especially the combustion of fossil fuels and biomass, industrial processes and waste
incineration.61
Certain trace elements have signiﬁcant natural sources such as: from sea
spray near coastlines, dust from aeolian processes and weathering, especially
noted in Asia, and volcanoes with local, regional and global eﬀects. On any
given day however, the main source of trace elements in urban environments
will be through anthropogenic activities, and national regulations, especially
with regard to limits in gasoline, and emissions from coal ﬁred power plants,
as well as industrial, especially metallurgic and (in the case of mercury)

18

Ole Hertel and  Goodsite

chlor-alkali processes, mean that developing nations have higher levels in
general than western nations in their urban environments.
Trace metals have been measured in nearly all aerosol size fractions. It is
therefore of paramount importance to characterize the particle size distribution
and relate these to the potential adverse health eﬀects in the urban
population.61
As with PAHs, there are seasonal variations of trace metals in PM10 and
PM2.5 observed in campaigns conducted seasonally, with higher winter values
of nearly all trace elements suggesting a signiﬁcant source of particles from
domestic heating in most temperate urban areas, and/or less eﬃcient dispersion
of emissions in winter.

8.3

Recommendations for Modelling

A regional model for atmospheric photochemistry and particulate matter was
applied to predict the fate and transport of ﬁve trace metals; lead, manganese,
total chromium, nickel, and cadmium, over the continental United States
during January and July 2001.62 This study may be used to summarize the state
of the art of the modelling of trace metals and the limitations of trace metal
inventories. The authors recommend research in order to improve the model
results on emission data for aerial suspension of particles and biomass burning.
They note that including these sources will require models of aerial suspension
and combustion as well as composition data for fuel and soil over the modelled
location. Their recommendations will enable better modelling of especially lead
and manganese. They recommend further research to better quantify anthropogenic emissions of chromium, nickel and cadmium [in the US National
Emission Inventory (NEI)]. It is our opinion that their recommendations are
valid for most NEI.

9 Conclusions
Urban air pollution is a complex and dynamic mixture of gaseous and particulate pollutants with both daily and seasonal variation due to both anthropogenic activity levels and weather conditions. The highest urban air pollutant
concentrations of some of the most studied pollutants like PM10 and SO2 are
found is Africa, Asia and Latin America. The highest levels of photochemical
pollutants like O3 and NO2 are observed in Latin America and some of the
developed countries. The negative health eﬀects of urban air pollution are well
documented and found to be particularly severe in the mega-cities, where
quality of life is lessened due to air pollution and the possibility of reduced
productivity from toxics should be investigated.4 The actual pollution load in a
given urban area is the result of both local emissions and transport from both
nearby and more remote sources. The location of the city is very important
for the local dispersion conditions, which are governed by meteorology but are
also heavily aﬀected by topographical conditions (e.g. eﬀects of coastline,

Urban Air Pollution Climates throughout the World

19

mountains, valleys etc.). Studies of the impact of local harbours and airports
have generally pointed at a limited inﬂuence on urban air quality, and that the
impact is mainly related to the road traﬃc that these facilities are generating.
Although the health eﬀects of urban air pollution have been documented in
numerous studies, there are still major unknowns in this regard. This review
points at an urgent need for ﬁeld studies dedicated to a better characterisation
of urban particle pollution together with studies focussing at gaseous and
particulate PAHs and trace elements such as heavy metals. Such studies are
needed for the full assessment of the health impact on the urban population and
for providing the necessary basis for future urban air pollution management.
In this chapter we have not addressed the synergistic impact on human
health of the chemical cocktail arising from diverse sources in the various
micro-environments where the population reside in daily life. The negative
health eﬀects of air pollution may be enhanced by exposure to environmental
tobacco smoking, indoor sources like cooking, candles, stoves etc. but also by
exposures to non-airborne agents in textiles, food etc. For this complex interaction of diﬀerent exposures and their impact on human health, the reader is
referred to the literature.


Lett., 2008, 6, 95–100.
62. W. T. Hutzell and D. J. Luecken, Sci. Total Environ., 2008, 396, 164–179.
63. O. Hertel, T. Ellermann, F. Palmgren, R. Berkowicz, P. Løfstrøm, L. M.
Frohn, C. Geels, C. A. Skjøth, J. Brandt, J. Christensen, K. Kemp and M.
Ketzel, Environ. Chem. 2007, 4, 65–74.
64. O. Hertel, S. S. Jensen, M. Hvidberg, M. Ketzel, R. Berkowicz, F.
Palmgren, P. Wåhlin, M. Glasius, S. Loft, P. Vinzents, O. RaaschouNielsen, M. Sørensen and H. Bak, in Assessing the Impact of Traﬃc Air
Pollution on Human Exposures and Linking Exposures to Health Eﬀects
Traﬃc, Road Pricing and the Environment, ed. C. Jensen-Butler, B. Madsen, O.A. Nielsen and B. Sloth, Springer Press, 2007.

View publication stats

