Health impacts of air pollutionAround the world, nine out of 10 people breathe unhealthy air.Air pollution is now the biggest environmental risk for early death, responsible for as many as 5 million premature deaths each year from heart attacks, strokes, diabetes and respiratory diseases. That’s more than the deaths from AIDS, tuberculosis and malaria combined.Children, the elderly, people with existing diseases, and minority and low-income communities are particularly vulnerable to adverse health outcomes and economic impacts, such as missed work days, from exposure to air pollution.Research suggests that long term exposure to some pollutants increases the risk of emphysema more than smoking a pack of cigarettes a day. And recent studies show air pollution can impact mental health, worker productivity and even stock market performance.To understand the best way to develop solutions, it’s important to better understand this invisible threat. What we typically think of as "air pollution" is actually a mixture of small particles, including the below.Particulate matter (PM10, PM2.5)Particulate matter (PM) is made up of small airborne particles like dust, soot and drops of liquids. The majority of PM in urban areas is formed directly from burning of fossil fuels by power plants, automobiles, non-road equipment and industrial facilities. Other sources are dust, diesel emissions and secondary particle formation from gases and vapors.Coarse particulate matter (PM10, particles less than 10 microns in diameter) is known to cause nasal and upper respiratory tract health problems. Fine particles (PM2.5, particles less than 2.5 microns in diameter) penetrate deeper into the lungs and cause heart attacks, strokes, asthma, and bronchitis, as well as premature death from heart ailments, lung disease and cancer. Studies show that higher PM2.5 exposure can impair brain development in children.Black carbon (BC)Black carbon is one of the components of particulate matter and comes from burning fuel (especially diesel, wood, and coal). Most air pollution regulations focus on PM2.5, but exposure to black carbon is a serious health threat as well. Populations with higher exposures to black carbon over a long period are at a higher risk for heart attacks and stroke. In addition, black carbon is associated with hypertension, asthma, chronic obstructive pulmonary disease, bronchitis, and a variety of types of cancer.Nitrogen oxides (NO and NO2)Nitrogen oxide (NO) and nitrogen dioxide (NO2) are produced primarily by the transportation sector. NO is rapidly converted to NO2 in sunlight. NOx (a combination of NO and NO2) is formed in high concentrations around roadways and can result in development and exacerbations of asthma and bronchitis, and can lead to a higher risk of heart disease.Ozone (O3)Ozone high in the atmosphere can protect us from ultraviolet radiation. But ozone at ground level (where it is part of what is commonly called smog) is a well-established respiratory irritant. Ozone is formed in the atmosphere through reactions of volatile organic compounds and nitrogen oxides, both of which are formed as a result of combustion of fossil fuels. Short-term exposure to ozone can cause chest pain, coughing and throat irritation, while long term exposure can lead to decreased lung function and cause chronic obstructive pulmonary disease. In addition, ozone exposure can aggravate existing lung diseases.Sulfur dioxide (SO2)SO2 is emitted into the air by the burning of fossil fuels that contain sulfur. Coal, metal extraction and smelting, ship engines, and heavy equipment diesel equipment burn fuels that contain sulfur. Sulfur dioxide causes eye irritation, worsens asthma, increases susceptibility to respiratory infections and impacts the cardiovascular system. When SO2 combines with water, it forms sulfuric acid; this is the main component of acid rain, a known contributor to deforestation.Health impacts of air pollution in CanadaThe Government of Canada estimates that 14,600 premature deaths per year in Canada can be linked to air pollution from fine particulate matter, nitrogen dioxide and ozone, as outlined in the technical report Health Impacts of Air Pollution in Canada – Estimates of Morbidity Outcomes and Premature Mortalities - 2019 Report. In terms of annual morbidity outcomes, the number of asthma symptom days reaches 2.7 million, while the count of acute respiratory symptom days amounts to 35 million. The total economic valuation of the health impacts attributable to air pollution in Canada is $114B per year (based on 2015 currency).Health Canada's analysis makes use of the best available health and air quality data for Canada.Ambient levels for the pollutants are determined from a combination of:• satellite measurements;• ground measurements; and• air quality computer models.Maps are created to show:• air pollution levels across Canada for each pollutant; and• the distribution of the population across Canada.The exposure of Canadians to air pollution is then estimated by combining the air pollution and population maps.Health Canada uses a computer model called the Air Quality Benefits Assessment Tool (AQBAT). The AQBAT model includes mathematical equations that show associations between air pollution and health effects. These equations are based on robust scientific findings. The AQBAT model produces an estimate of the number of premature deaths (and other health outcomes) in Canada.The scientific method used is similar to those used by other health organizations, both in Canada and internationally. All conclude that air pollution has significant impacts on human health.The technical report Health Impacts of Air Pollution in Canada – Estimates of Morbidity Outcomes and Premature Mortalities - 2019 Report is available for download. For additional information on how the Government of Canada estimates air pollution health impacts, please contact hc.air.sc@canada.ca.What are the health risks of air pollution?Air pollution can affect:• breathing and lung conditions, such as:o asthmao allergieso chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD)• heart conditions, such as:o anginao arrhythmiao heart attacko heart failureo hypertensionIt can also increase the risk of stroke.Some pollutants and bacteria found mainly indoors are related to specific risks, such as:• asbestosis• Legionnaires' diseaseYour reaction to air pollution depends on:• the type and amount of contaminants you are exposed to• your overall health• your ageWhat are the symptoms you may experience because of air pollution?If you are suffering from the health effects of air pollution, symptoms can include:• tiredness• headache or dizziness• coughing and sneezing• wheezing or difficulty breathing• more mucous in the nose or throat• dry or irritated eyes, nose, throat and skinYou may notice these symptoms after a few minutes or hours and then feel better after leaving the affected area. This may be more noticeable if you have not spent much time in affected areas. For example, you may notice a difference after a vacation.People with lung or heart disease may experience more frequent and severe symptoms. They may also need more medication to reduce these symptoms.People with lung problemsPeople with asthma or chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD) may notice that they:• have more mucous• cough and wheeze more• experience shortness of breathPeople with heart problemsPeople with heart failure, heart rhythm problems or angina may experience:• light-headedness• a chest or arm pain• irregular heart beats• swelling in the ankles and feet• an increase in shortness of breathWho is most at risk for air pollution health effects?People who are most at risk for health effects are:• older adults• young children• those who are active outdoors• those who have existing heart conditions• those who live near industries or busy roadways• those who have existing breathing or lung problems and illnessesLung conditionsLung conditions that put people at risk for air pollution health effects include:• asthma• lung cancer• chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD)o this is sometimes called chronic bronchitis or emphysemaHeart conditionsPeople who have previously suffered a heart attack are at risk. Other heart conditions that put people at risk include:• heart failure (your heart is too weak to move blood around the body)• angina (chest pain that happens when your heart does not get enough oxygen-rich blood)• heart rhythm problems like arrhythmia (your heart either beats too fast, too slow or is irregular)Those with diabetes are also at risk for air pollution health effects. This is because people with diabetes are also likely to have a heart condition.Young childrenYoung children breathe in more air in relation to their body weight than people in other age groups. This means that they breathe in more contaminants, so air pollution affects them more.The body’s defence and lung systems are also not fully developed yet. Therefore, young children cannot easily fight off sicknesses that may result from air pollution.Older adultsOlder adults may have weaker lungs, heart and defence systems. They may also have an undiagnosed lung or heart condition.Those who are active outdoorsPeople who play sports or do hard work outdoors breathe faster and more deeply than others. This allows more air pollution to enter the lungs.Those who live near industries or busy roadwaysPeople who live near industries or busy roadways are closer to major sources of air pollution. They may be exposed to more pollutants from these sources.What should you do if you think you are suffering from health problems related to air quality?If you think that you are suffering from health problems related to air pollution, it is important to:• keep track of when you get symptoms and when they go away• discuss your symptoms with your health care providerThis will help your health care provider determine if your symptoms are related to• air quality problems, including indoor air quality issues• another health issueIf you are suffering from poor indoor air quality at work, you should:• discuss your concerns with your supervisor or health and safety representative• contact your provincial or territorial government for information and advice on workplace health and safetyHealth Effects of Air Pollutants on Vulnerable PopulationsResearch has shown that some people are more susceptible than others to air pollutants. These groups include children, pregnant women, older adults, and individuals with pre-existing heart and lung disease. People in low socioeconomic neighborhoods and communities may be more vulnerable to air pollution because of many factors. Proximity to industrial sources of air pollution, underlying health problems, poor nutrition, stress, and other factors can contribute to increased health impacts in these communities.There is a need for greater understanding of the factors that may influence whether a population or age group is at increased risk of health effects from air pollution. In addition, advances to analytical approaches used to study the health effects from air pollution will improve exposure estimates for healthy and at-risk groups.The research by EPA scientists and others inform the required reviews of the primary National Ambient Air Quality Standards (NAAQS), which is done with the development of Integrated Science Assessments (ISAs). These ISAs are mandated by Congress every five years to assess the current state of the science on criteria air pollutants and determine if the standards provide adequate protection to public health. Research is focused on addressing four areas:• Identifying and characterizing whether there are key reproductive factors and critical stages of development that are impacted by air pollution exposures;• Determining the role of acute and chronic sociodemographic factors in air pollution health disparities;• Understanding how diet modifies responses to air pollution;• Evaluating long-term lifestyle and chronic disease effects on air pollution-induced respiratory and cardiovascular responsesA multi-disciplinary team of investigators is coordinating epidemiological, human observational, and basic toxicological research to assess the effects of air pollution in at-risk populations and develop strategies to protect these populations, particularly those with pre-existing disease. The results from these products will improve risk assessments by clarifying the role of modifying factors such as psychosocial stress (e.g. noise) and diet, and determining the impact of individual susceptibility on the relationship between air pollutant exposures and health.Long-Term and Short-Term Effects from Exposure to Air PollutantsPeople can experience exposure to varying concentrations of air pollution. Poor air quality can impact individuals for a short period of time during the day, or more frequently during a given day. Exposure to pollutants can also occur over multiple days, weeks or months due to seasonal air pollution, such as increased ozone during the summer or particulate matter from woodstoves during the winter.The health impact of air pollution exposure depends on the duration and concentrations, and the health status of the affected populations. Studies are needed to increase knowledge of the exposure duration and the possible cumulative increase in risk.The research is focused on three main areas: • Short-term peak exposures, such as wildfires, traffic-related sources, or other episodic events;• Intermittent and cumulative exposures;•  Mechanisms underlying the exposure risksResearchers are evaluating the health responses of intermittent multiple days versus one-day air pollution exposure in controlled human exposure, animal, and in vitro models and associated cellular and molecular mechanisms. They are employing population-based models and electronic health records to assess the health effects of short-term and long-term exposures and identifying populations at greatest risk of health effects. The work is improving our understanding of the possible cumulative effects of multiple short-term peak exposures and the relationship of these exposures to longer-term exposures and risks.Multipollutant Exposures and Changes in Environmental Conditions  EPA research is providing information to understand how individuals may respond to two or more pollutants or mixtures and how environmental conditions may impact air quality. While risk estimates for exposure to individual criteria air pollutants such as PM and ozone are well established, the acute and cumulative effects of combinations of pollutants is not well understood. In addition, research is needed to determine how changes in the environment affect both pollutant formation and subsequent responsiveness to exposures in healthy and susceptible individuals.The research is focused on three specific questions: • What is the role of temperature and photochemical aging on the health impact of wildfire smoke and air pollution mixtures?• What is the effect of changing environmental conditions (i.e., temperature and humidity) on responsiveness to air pollution?• Does prior pollutant exposure modify responsiveness to subsequent exposures?The integrated, multi-disciplinary research includes:• Epidemiologic analyses of environmental influences on morbidity and mortality in populations,• Simulations of changing environmental conditions in multi-pollutant formation in atmospheric chamber studies coupled with clinical and toxicological assessments in healthy and at-risk populations,• Evaluation of pre-exposure as a modifying effect on subsequent exposuresThe results are revealing how changes in environmental conditions affect pollutant formation and subsequent health impact in at-risk populations. The research findings are informing EPA’s Integrated Science  Assessments for criteria air pollutants and assisting with future regulatory decisions on the National Ambient Air Quality Standards (NAAQS).Leveraging Big Data for Innovations in Health Science  EPA is at the cutting edge of health science, using electronic health records, novel data systems, tissue-like advanced cellular models, molecular approaches, and animal models to evaluate the health impacts of air pollution.  Researchers are using these powerful new techniques to identify factors that may increase sensitivity and vulnerability to air pollution effects. The research is building capacity for future risk assessment and regulatory analyses that go beyond traditional lines of evidence to more clearly define populations and lifestages at increased risk of health effects from air pollution.To continue to protect public health from poor air quality, researchers must consider new epidemiological, toxicological and clinical approaches to understand the health risks of poor air quality and the biological mechanisms responsible for these risks. At the center of these new research approaches is an explosion of data availability and methodological approaches for handling large clinical and molecular datasets, also known as "big data."While data of increasing size, depth, and complexity have accelerated research for many industries and scientific fields, big data is sometimes less recognized for the impacts it is having on environmental health studies. Increasingly, researchers are able to examine vulnerable populations with unprecedented precision and detail while also evaluating hundreds of thousands of molecular biomarkers in order to understand biological mechanisms associated with exposure.Health Effects of Wildfire SmokeLarger and more intense wildfires are creating the potential for greater smoke production and chronic exposures in the United States, particularly in the West. Wildfires increase air pollution in surrounding areas and can affect regional air quality.The health effects of wildfire smoke can range from eye and respiratory tract irritation to more serious disorders, including reduced lung function, exacerbation of asthma and heart failure, and premature death. Children, pregnant women, and the elderly are especially vulnerable to smoke exposure. Emissions from wildfires are known to cause increased visits to hospitals and clinics by those exposed to smoke.It is important to more fully understand the human health effects associated with short- and long-term exposures to smoke from wildfires as well as prescribed fires, together referred to as wildland fires. EPA is conducting research to advance understanding of the health effects from different types of fires as well as combustion phases. Researchers want to know:• What is the full extent of health effects from smoke exposure?• Who is most at risk?• Are there differences in health effects from different wildfire fuel types or combustion phases (burning versus flaming)?• What strategies and approaches are most effective in protecting public health?• What are the environmental, social and economic impacts of wildfire emissions?Public Health Intervention and Communications StrategiesMany communities throughout the United States face challenges in providing advice to residents about how best to protect their health when they are exposed to elevated concentrations of air pollutants from motor vehicle and industrial emissions and other sources of combustion, including wildland fire smoke.Researchers are studying intervention strategies to reduce the health impacts from exposure to air pollution as well as ways to effectively communicate these health risks. To translate the science for use in public health communication and community empowerment, EPA is collaborating with other federal agencies, such as the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC) and the National Heart, Lung, and Blood Institute (NHLBI), and state and local agencies and tribes. The objectives are to identify ways to lower air pollution exposure or mitigate the biological responses at individual, community or ecosystem levels, and ultimately evaluate whether such interventions have benefits as measured by indicators of health, well-being or economics.Studies are evaluating the interactions between behavior and social and economic factors to more thoroughly understand how these factors may influence health and well-being outcomes, which can inform effective and consistent health risk messaging. EPA sets National Ambient Air Quality Standards (NAAQS) for six principal criteria air pollutants—nitrogen oxides, sulfur oxides, particulate matter, carbon monoxide, ozone and lead—all of which have been shown to be harmful to public health and the environment.The Agency’s Integrated Science Assessments (ISAs) form the scientific foundation for the review of the NAAQS standards by providing the primary (human health-based) assessments and secondary (welfare-based, e.g. ecology, visibility, materials) assessments. The ISAs are assessments of the state of the science on the criteria pollutants. They are conducted as mandated under the Clean Air Act.AIR POLLUTION is a major blot on our environmental
health scorecard: in some Western countries, it is estimated
that car emissions kill twice as many people as car crashes.1
In both urban Australia and New Zealand, the main sources
of air pollution are motor vehicle emissions, wood smoke
from home heating, and industrial pollution. Bushfires are
another important source of air pollution in some parts of
Australia. In New Zealand, an estimated 900 deaths per year
are attributable to air pollution (2% of all deaths), of which
nearly half are due to motor vehicle emissions.2
 If a third of
these deaths could be avoided through increased public
transport use (and thus reduced car use), improved fuels
and pollution-control technology for cars, the “lives saved”
would be greater than deaths due to HIV/AIDS, malignant
melanoma, or workplace injuries.2
The effect of air pollution on health has become a major
concern in recent years. In Australia, the increasing interest
in this issue has been spurred not so much by a worsening of
air quality as by accumulating evidence of its effect on health
and the perceived need to “do something about it”. Epidemiological research into air pollution over the past 20 years
has demonstrated cardiorespiratory health effects ranging
from minor respiratory symptoms to increased hospital
admissions and mortality.3
 Toxicological and clinical studies
have elucidated the mechanisms for some effects, but the
association between relatively low urban air pollution levels
and increased cardiorespiratory mortality has not yet been
explained.
There is also increasing global awareness of the extreme
levels of indoor and outdoor air pollution arising from the
use of coal and biomass (eg, wood, farm waste, cowdung)
for cooking and heating in developing countries.4
 Coalburning to fuel industry and produce electricity is another
major source of air pollution in some countries — for
example, India and China, where cheap coal is an important
factor in industrialisation. On top of this, most developing
countries have a rapidly worsening problem of motor vehicle
traffic congestion and associated air pollution (Box 1). The
combination of these factors means that in most large urban
areas exposure to air pollution is severe.
Major air pollutants
The sources, health effects and vulnerable groups for major
air pollutants are summarised in Box 2. In typical urban air
pollution situations, particulate matter (PM) and gaseous
pollutants (oxides of nitrogen [NOx], ozone, carbon monoxide [CO] and “air toxics” [eg, hydrocarbons, aldehydes])
occur together, as the sources are the same. Furthermore,
levels of pollutants vary dramatically by location and over
time, depending on changing meteorological factors such as
wind speed and wind direction. This makes it very difficult
to isolate the health effects of individual pollutants. It is
more useful to consider each of the major pollutants as
“indicators” of the mixture of air pollution created by motor
vehicles, home heating and industry. Continuous monitoring of PM, NOx, ozone and CO has been established in
recent years in the major Australian cities,6
 but these data
provide only general estimates of actual exposures in individuals. CO is the only major air pollutant for which a
biomarker of exposure (carboxyhaemoglobin in erythrocytes) is currently available.
Researchers are currently investigating the importance of the size
and chemical composition of particles as a causal factor for cardiorespiratory effects.3
 Focus has now
shifted to the very small particles,
PM2.5 and PM1 (ie, particles
smaller than 2.5 m or 1 m,
respectively).3
 As very small particles penetrate further into the lungs
than larger particles, they are
believed to be more strongly associated with adverse health effects.
Diesel engine emissions contribute
disproportionately to the verysmall-particle fraction of urban air
pollution.7
The recent documentation of
lung cancer as an effect of longterm exposure to urban air
pollution8
 puts the spotlight on carcinogenic chemicals in the smallest
air particles and on carcinogenic
gases (eg, benzene; benzo-
(alpha)pyrene) as possible causal
agents.
Carbon dioxide (CO2), another
air pollutant created by fuel combustion, has no direct health effects at the concentrations occurring in the ambient environment.
However, it is the main “greenhouse gas” causing global
climate change9
 and, as such, indirectly contributes to the
global health impact of such change. Australia and New
Zealand are among the few countries where vehicle-related
CO2 emissions have substantially increased since 1996,
when the Kyoto Protocol on greenhouse gas reductions was
signed. Efforts to reduce urban air pollution by reducing the
use of cars would have the added benefit of reducing CO2
emissions.
Adverse health effects
There is an exhaustive literature on the health effects of the
major air pollutants, including numerous epidemiological
and toxicological studies. In a recent review,10 the American
Thoracic Society (ATS) expanded its list of adverse health
effects of air pollution to include not only clinical outcomes
(such as hospital admissions, loss of lung function, and
mortality) (Box 2), but also diminished quality of life and
subclinical symptoms that may interfere with daily activities
(Box 3). In any particular study, establishing whether there
is an association between air pollution and one or more of
the effects listed in Box 2 and Box 3 depends on exposure
level, the background health status of the population
exposed, and their age. Thus, some of the evidence may
appear conflicting, and the ATS recommends that the
effects in Box 3 should be included in future studies.10 We
describe here the key epidemiological findings on the major
effects of air pollution.
Mortality
Most recent epidemiological studies of air pollution and
mortality have used time-series analysis to relate daily mortality rates to daily air pollution levels (on the same day
or previous days). However, this approach cannot be used to
ascertain whether increased mortality reflects a significant
reduction in life expectancy.3
A few studies have documented associations between
mortality and air pollution exposure over longer periods.
The Harvard “six cities” study11 involved a 14–16-year
prospective cohort of more than 8000 adults in the United
States, and the American Cancer Society (ACS) study
collected data on over 500 000 people living in 51 different
US metropolitan areas from 1982 to 2000.8,12 These studies
reported significant associations between annual average
particle pollution levels (PM10 or PM2.5) and annual allcause mortality rates: an average increase of 10 g/m3
 of
PM10 or PM2.5 was associated with a 3%–4% increase in
mortality. The ACS study also found a significant association between levels of PM2.5 and deaths due to cardiorespiratory diseases and lung cancer.8
A “natural intervention” study with long-term exposure
and effect data analysed mortality in Dublin before and after
coal-burning was banned in 1990.13 The annual average
particle pollution level declined by 36% after the ban, while
adjusted mortality rates decreased by 15.5% and 10.3% for
respiratory and cardiovascular deaths, respectively.
No long-term exposure studies have been carried out in
Australia or New Zealand, but short-term time-series analy-ses suggest that the situation here is similar to that observed
in many US and European studies. Significant associations
between daily PM10, NOx and/or CO levels and daily
cardiorespiratory mortality have been found in Sydney,14
Brisbane,15 and Christchurch,16 but the associations have
been weaker in Melbourne17 and Perth.18
A review of epidemiological studies concluded that there
may be a relationship between acute ozone exposure and
increased mortality,19 especially in elderly people. However,
the concurrence of high ozone levels with hot weather makes
it difficult to separate the effect of heat from the effect of
ozone on mortality. In Australia, ozone levels have been
found to affect daily mortality rates in Sydney, Brisbane and
Melbourne,15,17 but the interpretation of these results raises
similar concerns to those of the recent review.19
Hospital admissions
Acute time-series studies3
 have shown associations between
particle pollution and daily hospital admissions, mainly for
respiratory disease (especially asthma and chronic obstructive pulmonary disease) but also for cardiovascular diseases.18,20-23
Other effects
Studies in Australia have reported an association between
particle exposure from dust storms and exacerbation of
asthma symptoms,24 and between particle exposure and
decreased lung function in people with asthma.25
Some studies have suggested that air pollutants are related
to respiratory allergic diseases by the interaction between
pollen allergens and air pollutants: air pollutants adhering to
pollen grains may increase their impact, and probably also
heighten airway responsiveness to aeroallergens.26
Role of the clinician
Decisions about patient management would not normally be
influenced by the patient’s exposure to air pollution. (The
causal role of air pollution in disease is an epidemiological
diagnosis.) However, the following advice may be appropriate for patients who are particularly at risk (eg, those with
severe cardiac or respiratory disease):
■ Avoid specific exposure situations (such as walking along
a highly polluted road) if these appear to exacerbate symptoms;
■ Avoid outdoor activities during smog episodes, particularly exercise in the afternoons, when ozone levels are
highest27 (as a result of delayed interaction between sunlight
and morning peak-hour motor vehicle emissions);
■ (For patients with asthma) self-monitor peak expiratory
flow more frequently during smog episodes and adjust
medication if necessary;27
■ Avoid exposures to extreme heat or cold, as these can
further exacerbate the health effects of air pollution;
■ Stop smoking, as this further exacerbates the risk of
cardiorespiratory diseases.
The shifting panorama
Current levels of major air pollutants in Australian capital
cities and New Zealand only occasionally exceed air quality
guidelines. Particle pollution levels have remained relatively
stable during recent years, while NO2 levels are only slowly
declining (Box 4), as the increasing number of vehicles and
kilometres driven have been mitigated by increasing use of
catalytic converters (for vehicle emission reduction) and
improved-quality diesel fuel.
However, the epidemiological evidence shows that air
pollution, even at levels below the commonly used air
quality guidelines,3,8,11 increases mortality rates.2
 To reduce
the burden of disease related to air pollution, Australian and
New Zealand governments could choose from a range of
policy options that would make the air cleaner in the long
term — for example, providing support and infrastructure
for increased use of public transport, walking and bicycling;
popularising new vehicles with low-pollution engines; and
encouraging improved efficiency of household heating and
cooling devices.
From a global perspective, many developing countries are
at a similar stage of industrial and urban development to
Western countries 50–80 years ago, when high levels of
ambient air pollution from coal-burning were common. At
the household level in developing countries, promoting
energy-efficient and less-polluting cooking stoves constructed from local materials would be an important step in
reducing air pollution. Switching the energy source for
cooking to less-polluting kerosene, gas and electricity is another solution, often out of reach for poor communities in
the short term.
Worldwide, a major change in priorities is needed to steer
economic development towards low-pollution policies
Associations between air pollution and
multiple health effects are now well established (Pope 2007; Pope and Dockery 2006;
Pope et al. 2002). For key pollutants such as
particulate matter (PM) and ozone (Green
et al. 1999), there are no established thresholds of exposure below which population
health impacts are absent. Given that everyone is exposed to some level of air pollution,
the attributable health burden can be high,
particularly for vulnerable subpopulations.
Recent evidence that air pollution leads to
inflammatory processes that mediate a variety
of diseases suggests an expanding range of
health impacts related to air pollution exposure. Consequently, the population health burden may be greater than previously believed.
A discussion of the biological mechanisms
by which air pollution leads to cardiovascular
and respiratory disease has been covered in
detail elsewhere (Brook et al. 2010; Ko and
Hui 2009; Mittleman 2007; Nogueira 2009;
Patel and Miller 2009) and is beyond the
scope of this review. However, a mechanistic
understanding provides information on the
effects of timing and exposure duration on
disease development and progression, how
pollutants interact with other stressors, and
potential mitigating factors such as nutritional
supplementation or medications. Ambient PM
affects respiratory and cardiovascular disease
development and exacerbation via pulmonary
(neurologic) reflexes and pulmonary inflammation. Under some circumstances, these
responses result in systemic inflammation,
oxidative stress, and altered vascular function.
Collectively, these processes can contribute
to cardiovascular and pulmonary diseases,
including atherosclerosis.
Evidence from natural experiments
(Clancy et al. 2002; Parker et al. 2008; Pope
2007) and from analyses of long-term trends
(Laden et al. 2006; Pope et al. 2009) indicates
that reducing air pollution has clear health
benefits. Traditionally, air quality management has focused on emissions-based pollution control. Although regulations promoting
cleaner vehicle engine technology, power
production, and industrial combustion processes have clearly led to decreased emissions,
increases in vehicle-kilometers traveled and
overall power generation and industrial activity may offset their effectiveness. Interventions
separating people from pollution, which
reduce exposure independent of emissions
controls and mitigate health impacts, have
largely been overlooked as components of formal strategies. For example, land-use decisions
typically do not consider air pollution–related
health impacts and do not require minimum
distances between sources and individuals. A
consequence of this has been the siting of residences, schools, and hospitals near major traffic arteries. Modification of the infiltration of
outdoor pollutants into indoor environments,
which is largely a function of air exchange and
building design, offers further opportunities
for exposure reduction. Activity modification
at an individual level such as altering the duration, intensity, and location where individuals are physically active can also help reduce
air pollution exposure and dose. Because the
benefits of exercise on health are well established, whereas the net consequences of physical activity in polluted environments remain
unclear, recommendations on this topic
must carefully weigh the benefits and risks
of outdoor physical activity. To make further progress in reducing air pollution–related health impacts, a new framework is needed
that incorporates strategies at regulatory, community, and individual levels, to reduce both
emissions and exposures.
Objectives
An international workshop with participants from multiple disciplines, titled “From
Good Intentions to Proven Interventions:
Effectiveness of Actions to Reduce the Health
Impacts of Air Pollution,” was convened
26–27 March 2009 in Vancouver, British
Columbia, Canada. Participants included
health and environmental researchers, public policy makers, air quality managers, health
care providers, and nongovernmental organization representatives. The primary focus of
the workshop was to discuss evidence of the
effectiveness of actions, at the community and
individual level, to reduce health impacts of
air pollution. Although national-level policies
and management programs as well as specific
emissions reductions programs have received
considerable attention, this workshop focused
on the state of the science around specific
community- and individual-level interventions.
Some examples are behavior and its impact on
exposure, medications and their influence on
health outcomes given air pollution exposure,
and strategies to reduce individual baseline risk
of conditions associated with increased susceptibility to the effects of air pollution. The
current understanding of biological mechanisms such as systemic and local inflammatory
impacts and the role of air pollution relative to
these disease processes, were discussed, as was
the role of exposure duration in disease initiation progression and reversal.
Community-Level Interventions
to Reduce Exposure
Past and current outdoor air quality management activities have largely focused on
emissions reductions. From a public health
perspective, activities such as technological
improvements in combustion technology or
fuel standards have the advantage of avoiding
the well-documented challenges of persuading individuals to voluntarily change their
behavior in order to protect themselves. Air
pollution controls have resulted in substantial decreases in levels of air pollution, leading to measurable health benefits (Clancy
et al. 2002; Downs et al. 2007; Medley
et al. 2002; Pope et al. 2009; Schindler et al.
2009). Analysis of the effectiveness of regulations and air quality management actions to
reduce air pollution and its associated health
impacts is an active area of research that is
discussed in more detail elsewhere (van Erp
et al. 2008). Targeting specific sources that
contribute significantly to air pollution is an
important strategy in improving air quality.
During the workshop, several case studies of
community-level interventions were presented
including Dublin’s (Ireland) ban on sales of
coal, Libby’s (Montana) woodstove exchange
program, and London’s (United Kingdom)
congestion charge zone (CCZ) and lowemission zone (LEZ) programs. These were
examples of how source substitution, technology upgrades, and urban/transportation
planning can lead to decreases in exposure
and/or health impacts. Although we briefly
review these examples below, it is important
to consider that community-level efforts will
largely be location specific because they focus
on major sources of local pollution.
Before the 1990 ban on the sale of coal,
coal-related combustion was a major source
of ambient air pollution in Dublin (Clancy
et al. 2002). Within 6 years of the ban, ambient levels of black smoke and sulfur dioxide
decreased 70% and 35%, respectively. During
the initial 72-month period after the ban,
total mortality decreased by 6% [95% confidence interval (CI), 4–7%] (Clancy et al.
2002). As expected, the largest effects were
seen for respiratory and cardiovascular deaths,
with decreases of 16% (95% CI, 12–19%)
and 10% (95% CI, 8–13%), respectively.
In many communities, residential wood
heating is an important contributor to wintertime pollution (Naeher et al. 2007). Because
wood burning typically occurs in residential
areas, the intake fraction (the ratio of the total
mass of a pollutant inhaled to the mass of the
pollutant emitted) of woodsmoke PM with
an aerodynamic diameter of ≤ 2.5 µm (PM2.5)
is higher compared with PM2.5 from other
sources, such as traffic (Ries et al. 2009); this
suggests that reducing woodsmoke emissions
can effectively reduce PM2.5 exposures. To
address this, woodstove exchange programs
that encourage residents to replace older
stoves with newer, cleaner burning models
have been broadly implemented. Follow-up
of a large woodstove exchange campaign in
Libby, where nearly 90% of woodstoves were
replaced or removed, showed reductions of
20%, 64%, and 50% in average wintertime
concentrations of (November–February)
PM2.5, polycyclic aromatic hydrocarbons,
and levoglucosan (a woodsmoke tracer),
respectively, compared with precampaign levels (Bergauff et al. 2008; Ward et al. 2009).
Preliminary analysis across the four winter
seasons spanning the stove exchange found
decreased reporting of childhood wheeze
[odds ratio (OR) = 0.75 per 5-μg/m3 reduction in ambient PM2.5; 95% CI, 0.56–1.00],
upper respiratory infections, and bronchitis.
Traffic-related air pollution is an important source of primary and secondary pollutants and a major contributor to intraurban
variability in pollutant concentrations.
Accordingly, urban and transportation planning approaches may be effective in reducing
this variability, as well as the overall impact
of this pollution source. To address traffic
congestion in central London, a congestion
charge scheme (CCS) was implemented in
2003. Although the objective of the CCS was
to reduce the traffic congestion in the central city zone, air pollution reduction was a
potential co-benefit (Tonne et al. 2008). The
implementation of the CCS was estimated
to lead to a modest decrease of 0.73 µg/m3 in
the annual average nitrogen dioxide concentration in the CCZ; however, this decrease
was associated with an increase of 183 years
of life gained per 100,000 population in the
CCZ (Tonne et al. 2008). Although traffic
congestion decreased initially, levels did reach
pre-CCS conditions after 4 years, which may
account for the limited improvement in air
quality. Other positive health impacts that
may have resulted from the implementation
of the CCS, but were not formally investigated, included an increase in active transport (cycling and walking, albeit mitigated
by exposure in a high-traffic zone), a decrease
in noise pollution and related stress, and a
decrease in vehicle traffic accidents. More
recently, London has also implemented an
LEZ specifically to target air pollution. The
most polluting vehicles (as defined by the
program), including heavy-duty diesel vehicles, larger vans, and buses, must pay a daily
charge to travel through the LEZ (Kelly and
Kelly 2009). By 2012, it is estimated that
this program will lead to a 6.6% reduction
in PM10 (PM with aerodynamic diameter
≤ 10 µm) levels (Kelly and Kelly 2009). LEZ
programs have also been implemented elsewhere, including Tokyo, Japan, and Sweden,
to reduce air and noise pollution.
The examples above illustrate how targeted interventions can affect sources such as
woodsmoke and vehicle traffic that operate in
close proximity to populations. Vehicle traffic
has become a major source of air pollution
in many communities, and the benefits of
strategies that address only emissions reductions through improved vehicle technology
and fuel quality may be at least partially offset
by increases in vehicle-kilometers traveled.
Although the future introduction of zeroemission vehicles such as electric cars may
eliminate the need for alternative approaches
to reduce the impact of traffic-related air pollution, the broad proliferation of vehicles that
do not emit pollutants is likely to be at least
20–30 years away (America’s Energy Future
Panel on Energy Efficiency Technologies
2009). Until zero-emission vehicles are universal, land-use planning that favors sprawl
and increased commuting distances, coupled
with poor public transit options, places greater
dependence on vehicle travel. This is likely to
result in increased emissions of ozone precursors as well as increased pollutant exposure for those residing in areas close to major traffic
arteries, sitting in vehicles during heavy traffic, and attempting to walk, run, or bike along
roads. Even in a scenario of decreasing pervehicle emissions, a global economy that relies
heavily on the transport of goods over large
distances (Perez et al. 2009) and increasing
industrial and transportation activity close to
communities (Hricko 2008) may also result in
elevated exposures. A paradigm shift in how
cities are designed and organized, with separation of densely populated areas from major
traffic arteries coupled with continued emissions reduction (e.g., via low-emission public
transit) could significantly reduce individual
exposure to traffic-related air pollutants. Such
planning approaches must also consider
other relationships between built environment and health, such as the relationship
between increased sprawl and ozone concentrations (Stone 2008) and between increased
neighborhood walkability (via higher density,
street connectivity, and mixed-use design)
and elevated concentrations of traffic-related
pollutants (Marshall et al. 2009).
Although individuals are not typically
exposed to single pollutants, experimental
and epidemiologic study designs are limited
in their ability to investigate the health effects
of concurrent exposure to multiple pollutants.
This is also a limitation of current air quality
management. From a regulatory standpoint,
guidelines, standards, and emissions limits
are developed for single pollutants, under
the notion that a given pollutant, although
present in mixtures, acts individually to affect
health and the environment (Nadadur et al.
2007) and serves as a proxy for a more complex exposure. Although it is challenging to
implement regulatory approaches for pollutant mixes, a deviation from the current singlepollutant approach (Dominici et al. 2010)
needs to be considered. Synergy involving
ozone and other pollutants such as black carbon, and nitrogen dioxide has been demonstrated in animal and human populations
(Mauderly and Samet 2009). In combination,
these pollutants may cause a greater additive
effect on lung function, cytokine production,
and cardiac output and stroke volume compared with the individual pollutants themselves (Mauderly and Samet 2009). Assessing
the effects of individual pollutants likely presents only a partial description of the overall
health impact of air pollution exposure.
Given the potential for additive or synergistic effects, approaches that reduce exposure
to multiple pollutants may be more effective than efforts to reduce emissions of single
compounds. For example, with accumulating
evidence of cardiopulmonary morbidity and
mortality associated with traffic-related air
pollution exposure (Health Effects Institute
2010), increasing the distance between
populations and major roads may result in
substantial health benefits. Attenuated lung
function, increased markers of oxidative stress,
and airway inflammation have been shown
in asthmatics and nonasthmatics exposed
to road-traffic pollution (Barraza-Villarreal
et al. 2008; McCreanor et al. 2007; Romieu
et al. 2008a). Additionally, children exposed
to higher levels of traffic-related pollution
(> 0.41 µg/m3 elemental carbon attributable
to traffic) before 12 months of age have an
increased risk of persistent wheeze (OR =
1.75; 95% CI, 1.07–2.87) (Ryan et al. 2009).
Individuals residing within 50 m of a major
road have a 63% excess risk of developing
high coronary artery calcification compared
with those living > 200 m away from a major
road (Hoffmann et al. 2007), suggesting that
the separation of residential areas from major
roads may be an important public health
intervention. Although separating individuals from pollution sources is likely to have
health benefits, not all pollutants (i.e., ozone)
decrease with increasing distance from roadways (Beckerman et al. 2008).
More specific evidence of the benefits
related to interventions can be found in recent
research indicating that adults who moved
away from residences in close proximity to
traffic (< 150 m from a highway or < 50 m
from a major road) had a lower risk of coronary heart disease (CHD) mortality than
did those remaining in locations close to traffic; in both cases, the risk of CHD mortality
was greater than in those who never lived in
close proximity to traffic (Gan et al. 2010).
Additionally, children who moved away from
residences with high background PM10 experienced an increased rate of lung function
growth compared with children who moved
to areas with high PM10 (Avol et al. 2001).
Finally, introducing an electronic toll collection along the New Jersey Turnpike to
reduce congestion was associated temporally
and spatially with reductions in incidence
of prematurity and low birth weight among
mothers living near toll plazas (Currie 2009).
These findings suggest that community design
that aims to separate such facilities as schools,
child care centers, and hospitals from major
traffic arteries or approaches to mitigate traffic
congestion can reduce exposure and impacts
among vulnerable members of the population (California Air Resources Board 2005;
Ministry of Environment 2006a, 2006b).
In addition to simple separation of populations from traffic arteries, the establishment
of “mixed-use” (i.e., residential, commercial,
recreational) and high-density areas would
allow for more “walkable” cities, potentially
leading to reduced emissions through decreased
automobile use. “Walkability,” a measure of
how conducive an environment is to walking,
can help to predict levels of physical activity
and active transportation within the community (Frank and Engelke 2005). Community
design facilitating improved fitness may
reduce the health impacts of air pollution by
decreasing the proportion of the population
with underlying cardiopulmonary disease risk
factors, and therefore reduce their susceptibility to air pollution. Therefore, the development of more walkable communities has the
potential to provide population-level health
benefits through both lower emissions and a
decrease in underlying cardiovascular risk. Interventions Directed
to Individuals
In addition to the air quality management
strategies focused on emissions reductions and
local initiatives to control sources and separate
them from residential locations, schools, and
health care facilities, the workshop highlighted
the value of lowering baseline health risks
to reduce pollution-related health impacts.
Specifically, the implementation of established
primary, secondary, and tertiary interventions
(e.g., controlling hypertension, lowering lipids,
reducing obesity, promoting physical activity
and smoking cessation) for diseases affected
by air pollution exposure will serve to reduce
the overall burden of disease associated with
air pollution exposure. For example, sedentary
individuals and those with a diet deficient in
antioxidants or with a high salt diet may have
an increased risk of developing cardiovascular disease (Marchioli 2003; Qin et al. 2009;
Warburton et al. 2006) and may therefore
also be more susceptible to the effects of air
pollution. Through diet modification, exercise,
and possibly via antioxidant supplementation,
individuals can potentially reduce their personal susceptibility. Several of these approaches
are discussed in more detail below.