Indoor Air Pollution and HealthIndoor Air Quality (IAQ) refers to the air quality within and around buildings and structures, especially as it relates to the health and comfort of building occupants. Understanding and controlling common pollutants indoors can help reduce your risk of indoor health concerns.Health effects from indoor air pollutants may be experienced soon after exposure or, possibly, years later.Immediate EffectsSome health effects may show up shortly after a single exposure or repeated exposures to a pollutant. These include irritation of the eyes, nose, and throat, headaches, dizziness, and fatigue. Such immediate effects are usually short-term and treatable. Sometimes the treatment is simply eliminating the person's exposure to the source of the pollution, if it can be identified. Soon after exposure to some indoor air pollutants, symptoms of some diseases such as asthma may show up, be aggravated or worsened.The likelihood of immediate reactions to indoor air pollutants depends on several factors including age and preexisting medical conditions. In some cases, whether a person reacts to a pollutant depends on individual sensitivity, which varies tremendously from person to person. Some people can become sensitized to biological or chemical pollutants after repeated or high level exposures.Certain immediate effects are similar to those from colds or other viral diseases, so it is often difficult to determine if the symptoms are a result of exposure to indoor air pollution. For this reason, it is important to pay attention to the time and place symptoms occur. If the symptoms fade or go away when a person is away from the area, for example, an effort should be made to identify indoor air sources that may be possible causes. Some effects may be made worse by an inadequate supply of outdoor air coming indoors or from the heating, cooling or humidity conditions prevalent indoors.Long-Term EffectsOther health effects may show up either years after exposure has occurred or only after long or repeated periods of exposure. These effects, which include some respiratory diseases, heart disease and cancer, can be severely debilitating or fatal. It is prudent to try to improve the indoor air quality in your home even if symptoms are not noticeable.While pollutants commonly found in indoor air can cause many harmful effects, there is considerable uncertainty about what concentrations or periods of exposure are necessary to produce specific health problems. People also react very differently to exposure to indoor air pollutants. Further research is needed to better understand which health effects occur after exposure to the average pollutant concentrations found in homes and which occurs from the higher concentrations that occur for short periods of time.Primary Causes of Indoor Air ProblemsIndoor pollution sources that release gases or particles into the air are the primary cause of indoor air quality problems. Inadequate ventilation can increase indoor pollutant levels by not bringing in enough outdoor air to dilute emissions from indoor sources and by not carrying indoor air pollutants out of the area. High temperature and humidity levels can also increase concentrations of some pollutants.Pollutant SourcesThere are many sources of indoor air pollution. These can include:• Fuel-buring combustion appliances• Tobacco products• Building materials and furnishings as diverse as:o Deteriorated asbestos-containing insulationo Newly installed flooring, upholstery or carpeto Cabinetry or furniture made of certain pressed wood products• Products for household cleaning and maintenance, personal care, or hobbies• Central heating and cooling systems and humidification devices• Excess moisture• Outdoor sources such as:o Radono Pesticideso Outdoor air pollution.The relative importance of any single source depends on how much of a given pollutant it emits and how hazardous those emissions are. In some cases, factors such as how old the source is and whether it is properly maintained are significant. For example, an improperly adjusted gas stove can emit significantly more carbon monoxide than one that is properly adjusted.Some sources, such as building materials, furnishings and products like air fresheners, can release pollutants more or less continuously. Other sources, related to activities like smoking, cleaning,redecorating or doing hobblies release pollutants intermittently. Unvented or malfunctioning appliances or improperly used products can release higher and sometimes dangerous levels of pollutants indoors.Pollutant concentrations can remain in the air for long periods after some activities.Inadequate VentilationIf too little outdoor air enters indoors, pollutants can accumulate to levels that can pose health and comfort problems. Unless buildings are built with special mechanical means of ventilation, those designed and constructed to minimize the amount of outdoor air that can "leak" in and out may have higher indoor pollutant levels.How Outdoor Air Enters a BuildingOutdoor air can enter and leaves a building by: infiltration, natural ventilation, and mechanical ventilation. In a process known as infiltration, outdoor air flows into buildings through openings, joints, and cracks in walls, floors, and ceilings, and around windows and doors. In natural ventilation, air moves through opened windows and doors. Air movement associated with infiltration and natural ventilation is caused by air temperature differences between indoors and outdoors and by wind. Finally, there are a number of mechanical ventilation devices, from outdoor-vented fans that intermittently remove air from a single room, such as bathrooms and kitchen, to air handling systems that use fans and duct work to continuously remove indoor air and distribute filtered and conditioned outdoor air to strategic points throughout the house. The rate at which outdoor air replaces indoor air is described as the air exchange rate. When there is little infiltration, natural ventilation, or mechanical ventilation, the air exchange rate is low and pollutant levels can increase.Indoor Air Quality and Environmental JusticeEPA defines environmental justice (EJ) as "the fair treatment and meaningful involvement of all people regardless of race, color, national origin, or income with respect to the development, implementation, and enforcement of environmental laws, regulations, and policies."To effectively address EJ concerns, the Agency recognizes that communities must be the impetus for implementing local solutions for environmental health problems including indoor air. However, far too many communities lack the capacity to truly effect their environmental conditions. This includes some conditions found indoors, as well as conditions caused by outdoor impacts (such as climate change).Many reports and studies indicate that the following populations may be disproportionately impacted by indoor asthma triggers, secondhand smoke, mold, radon and other indoor pollutants:• children• elderly• low-income• minority• Tribes and indigenous people.EPA's Indoor Environments Division (IED) provides guidance and programs to help build the capacity of communities to understand and avoid indoor and outdoor health impacts. IED's main objective is to improve indoor air quality in buildings where people live, learn and work.Indoor air pollution is one of the world’s largest environmental problems – particularly for the poorest in the world who often do not have access to clean fuels for cooking.The Global Burden of Disease is a major global study on the causes and risk factors for death and disease published in the medical journal The Lancet.2 These estimates of the annual number of deaths attributed to a wide range of risk factors are shown here. This chart is shown for the global total, but can be explored for any country or region using the “change country” toggle.Indoor air pollution is a risk factor for several of the world’s leading causes of death, including heart disease, pneumonia, stroke, diabetes and lung cancer.3 In the chart we see that it is one of the leading risk factors for death globally.According to the Global Burden of Disease study 1.6 million people died prematurely in 2017 as a result of indoor air pollution. To put this into context: this was four times the number of homicides – close to 400,000 in 2017.Because the IHME data is more recent we rely mostly on IHME data in our work on indoor air pollution. But it’s worth noting that the WHO publishes a substantially larger number of indoor air pollution deaths. For 2012 (the latest available data) the WHO estimates 4.3 million deaths.4 IHME in contrast estimates 1.8 million deaths due to indoor air pollution for 2012. We are unfortunately not aware of any detailed explanation for the large discrepancy between these two estimates.It’s one of the leading risk factors for deaths globally; but for low-income countries, it’s the leading risk factor. If we look at the breakdown for countries with a low sociodemographic index – ‘Low SDI’ on the interactive chart – we see that indoor air pollution tops the list. For low-income countries, the number of premature deaths from air pollution is more than ten times the number from homicides in 2017.5The Institute for Health Metrics and Evaluation (IHME) estimates that 1.6 million people died prematurely as a result of indoor air pollution in 2017. This was 3% of global deaths. In low-income countries, it accounts for 6% of deaths.In the map here we see the share of annual deaths attributed to indoor air pollution across the world. In 2017 this ranged from a high of close to 11% in Papua New Guinea – more than 1-in-10 deaths – to less than 0.1% across most of Europe and North America.When we compare the share of deaths attributed to indoor air pollution either over time or between countries, we are not only comparing the extent of indoor air pollution, but its severity in the context of other risk factors for death. Indoor air pollution’s share does not only depend on how many die prematurely from it, but what else people are dying from and how this is changing.When we look at the share dying from indoor air pollution, figures are high across the lowest-income countries in Sub-Saharan Africa, but not markedly different from countries across Asia or Latin America. There, the severity of indoor air pollution – expressed as the share of deaths – has been masked by the role of other risk factors at low-incomes, such as low access to safe water, poor sanitation and unsafe sex which is a risk factor for HIV/AIDS.Death rates are highest across low income countriesDeath rates from indoor air pollution give us an accurate comparison of differences in its mortality impacts between countries and over time. In contrast to the share of deaths that we studied before, death rates are not influenced by how other causes or risk factors for death are changing.In this map we see death rates from indoor air pollution across the world. Death rates measure the number of deaths per 100,000 people in a given country or region.What becomes clear is the large differences in death rates between countries: rates are high in lower-income countries, particularly across Sub-Saharan Africa and Asia. Rates here are often greater than 100 deaths per 100,000 – in Papua New Guinea this was over 200 per 100,000.Compare this with death rates across high-income countries: across North America rates are below 0.1 deaths per 100,000. That’s a greater than 1000-fold difference.The issue of indoor air pollution therefore has a clear economic split: it is a problem that has almost been entirely eliminated across high-income countries, but remains a large environmental and health problem at lower incomes.We see this relationship clearly when we plot death rates versus income, as shown here. There is a strong negative relationship: death rates decline as countries get richer. This is also true when make this comparison between extreme poverty rates and pollution effects.How has mortality from indoor air pollution changed over time?Annual deaths from indoor air pollution have declined globally by more than 1 million since 1990Whilst indoor air pollution is still one of the leading risk factors for mortality, and the largest risk factor at low incomes, the world has also made significant progress in recent decades.Globally, the number of annual deaths from indoor air pollution has fallen by more than 1 million since 1990. As we see in the visualization, in 1990 an estimated 2.7 million died prematurely as a result; by 2017 this had fallen to 1.6 million.This means that despite continued population growth in recent decades, the total number of deaths from indoor air pollution has still declined.Indoor air pollution deaths have declined in most countriesWe have seen this progress across a large number of countries. In the scatterplot you see the comparison of the number of deaths from indoor air pollution in 1990 (shown on the y-axis) versus the number in 2017 (on the x-axis). The grey line here marks where the number of deaths would be equal in both years; countries which lie above the line had a higher number of deaths in 1990 than in 2017; and the opposite is true for countries below the line.Most countries lie above the grey line, meaning most have seen a decline in the number of deaths from indoor air pollution in recent decades.Death rates have declined in almost all countries in the worldWhich countries in the world have made progress on tackling indoor air pollution in recent decades? Almost all countries have.In the scatterplot here we see the comparison between the death rate from indoor air pollution in 1990 (shown on the y-axis) versus the death rate in 2017 (on the x-axis). The grey line here marks where the number of deaths would be equal in both years; countries which lie above the line had a higher number of deaths in 1990 than in 2017; and the opposite is true for countries below the line.Almost all countries – with the exception of Zimbabwe – lie above the grey line. This means progress has been made almost everywhere in the world in recent decades.How to make progress against indoor air pollution?IN THIS SECTION• Indoor air pollution results from poor access to clean cooking fuels• Poorer households have a higher dependence on solid fuels• Access to clean fuels for cookingIndoor air pollution results from poor access to clean cooking fuelsIndoor air pollution results from the burning of solid fuels such as crop waste, dung, charcoal and coal for cooking and heating in households. Burning these fuels produces particulate matter – a major health risk, particularly for respiratory diseases. The burning of such fuels in enclosed spaces such as small households is a major risk factor for exacerbation of these diseases.Low-income households tend to rely on solid fuels for cooking because cleaner fuels are either unavailable or too expensive. We therefore see a strong link between death rates from indoor air pollution and access to clean fuels for cooking.This is shown in the visualization: here we see that countries with the highest death rate from indoor air pollution are those with very low access to clean fuels (i.e. have a high dependence on solid fuels instead). As access to clean fuels and technologies increases, death rates from household air pollution begin and continue to fall.2.1 Exposure variables
One way to determine the health effects of indoor smoke from solid fuels
would be to apply the well-established exposure–response relationships
from epidemiological studies of outdoor, or ambient, concentrations of
Kirk R. Smith et al. 1437
Table 18.1 Major toxic pollutants of indoor air
Pollutant Major indoor sources
Fine particles Fuel/tobacco combustion, cleaning, fumes
from food being cooked, e.g. from cooking oil
Carbon monoxide Fuel/tobacco combustion
Polycyclic aromatic hydrocarbons Fuel/tobacco combustion, fumes from food
being cooked, e.g. from cooking oil
Nitrogen oxides Fuel combustion
Sulfur oxides Coal combustion
Arsenic and fluorine Coal combustion
Volatile and semi-volatile organic compounds Fuel/tobacco combustion, consumer products,
furnishings, construction materials, fumes
from food being cooked, e.g. from cooking oil
Aldehydes Furnishing, construction materials, cooking
Pesticides Consumer products, dust from outside
Asbestos Remodelling/demolition of construction
materials
Leada Remodelling/demolition of painted surfaces
Biological pollutants Moist areas, ventilation systems, furnishings
Free radicals and other short-lived, highly Indoor chemistry
reactive compounds
Radon Soil under building, construction materials
a Lead-containing dust from deteriorating paint is an important indoor pollutant for occupants of
many households, but the most critical exposure pathways are not usually through air. See
chapter 19.
Source: Zhang and Smith (2003).
the same pollutants (see chapter 17) to the household exposures, called
here the “pollutant-based approach” (Smith and Mehta 2003).
There are a number of potential problems with such an approach,
however, including:
• Differences in pollutant mixtures: Although particles are often used
as an indicator pollutant, the composition of particles (size, chemical
composition, etc.) as well as that of other pollutants varies from
source to source, and also changes with dispersion (Rossi et al. 1999).
• Differences in exposure patterns: The daily pattern of indoor air pollution sources varies from that of ambient sources, with large peaks
corresponding to cooking and heating schedules (Naeher et al.
2000b).
• Differences in exposure levels: Concentrations of particulates from the
indoor combustion of biomass have been measured at levels that are
10–50 times greater than in urban areas of developed countries, where
the main epidemiology of pollutants has been performed. Extrapolating exposure–response relationships by such a large factor is problematic, particularly as there are indications that the relationship
becomes more shallow at higher exposures (Bruce et al. 2000).
• Relevance of health outcomes addressed: Most studies of outdoor air
pollution have attempted to associate short-term changes in exposure
with acute health outcomes. This does not address the long-term
impact on chronic health outcomes, nor does it necessarily focus on
the health outcomes that are responsible for the bulk of the burden
of disease. In particular, ALRI, mostly in the form of pneumonia, are
likely to be responsible for the largest burden of disease caused by
exposure to indoor air pollution.
• Data on concentrations of particulate matter (PM) in indoor air1 are
sparse. In addition, most measurements have been made for concentrations of total particulates, which are less reliable indicators of risk
than smaller particles (PM10 or PM2.5).
An alternative approach, consistent with that used in most epidemiological studies in developing countries, is to divide the population
into categories of people that are exposed or not exposed to smoke
from solid fuel, on the basis of fuel use and ventilation. Although necessary here, owing to the current lack of exposure data, this method overlooks the large variability of exposure within each of these groups
(Naeher et al. 2000a). Furthermore, the method based on use of fuel is
affected by the first of the shortcomings listed above, as the same broad
category of fuels may produce different mixtures of pollutants in different settings. We also recognize that exposures from cooking and heating
1438 Comparative Quantification of Health Risks
can differ considerably because of different conversion technologies. It
was not possible to distinguish between the two end-uses in most cases,
however.
To account for differences in other factors (e.g. housing) that
would affect levels of pollution (Mehta and Smith 2002), we included a
second component in the exposure variable, which we refer to as the
“ventilation factor”. The final exposure variable in the population was
defined as:
We compiled a database of household use of solid fuel, from which
the prevalence of household use of solid fuel was estimated for each subregion.2 Using known values from this database, a statistical model was
developed to predict national use of solid fuel for countries without data.
Ventilation factors were assigned on the basis of qualitative evidence, to
account for differences in types of cooking and heating appliances and
housing.
2.2 Theoretical-minimum-risk exposure distribution
The theoretical minimum for this risk factor is clearly no use of solid
fuels for the production of household energy; this has already been
achieved in many populations. In reality, of course, there would still
be exposure to pollution from liquid and gaseous fuels, which might
be further reduced through a switch to use of electricity or of very wellventilated cooking conditions.
2.3 A database of household use of solid fuel
A database of households using solid fuel, expressed as a percentage of
all households, was compiled for 52 countries in 10 subregions, in order
to estimate global household use of solid fuel (see Table 18.2). Although
the data were acquired from studies conducted at different times in the
past decade, fuel-use patterns are unlikely to have changed drastically
within this time frame (International Energy Agency 2002; World
Resources Institute 2000). Out of necessity, the data were gathered from
various sources using different and, at times, non-validated methodology. We thus had to make many assumptions in order to facilitate subregional comparison and data manipulation associated with solid fuel
use. No households were reported to be using solid fuels for cooking in
AMR-A, EUR-A, EUR-C and WPR-A, presumably because countries in
these subregions have already shifted to cleaner fuels.
In many countries where large proportions of the population cook
with solid fuels, data on household energy are widely, although not universally, available. In some cases, the data come directly from national
census information or energy use statistics, which state explicitly the
number or fraction of households that rely predominantly on solid fuels
for their energy needs (Government of Botswana 1991; Government of
Brazil 1991; Government of Ecuador 1990b; Government of Ethiopia
1998; Government of India 1991b; Government of Mexico 1990b;
Government of Nigeria 1990; Government of Zimbabwe 1992). For
example, information on the main fuel used for cooking is collected
during the house listing of the census of India each decade (Government
of India 1991b). These data, disaggregated into urban and rural sectors,
are available at the district level (in India, a district contains about 2
million people).
In some countries, where censuses are infrequent and/or data on residential energy use are not collected, household surveys are an important source of information. Some of these household surveys, such as the
widely conducted Demographic Health Surveys are repeated, while
others may be conducted only once. For example, primary household
energy estimates for 22 countries in Africa, based on household surveys
with sample sizes ranging from 1000 to >14000 households, are included
in a database of development indicators for Africa, compiled by the
World Bank (2000). In China, data are available in the form of aggregate annual residential fuel consumption at the provincial level,
disaggregated by urban and rural areas (Government of China 1996).
Cooking and heating energies were distinguished using a simple model
that accounted for the average number of “heating days” in each
province, based on a 30-year average from 1951–1980 (Lin 1995). A
small amount of energy (2kg-coal equivalent per household per heating
day) was considered to be heating fuel and subtracted from the mix
of solid fuels in each province. The remaining heating-adjusted cooking
fuel was then normalized to “useful energy” using typical conversion
efficiencies for each fuel–stove combination reported (Zhang et al. 2000).
The proportion of useful cooking energy attributed to each fuel type
per household in each province was taken to represent the number of
households using that fuel. This analysis was repeated for each of the
provinces in China3 and aggregated to give a national total. It was estimated that in 1996 nearly 80% of the households in China used solid
fuels.
Many countries produce national estimates of solid-fuel use, but only
a minority collect specific information on fuel use at the household level.
Evidence from 10 countries (Bangladesh, Ecuador, Indonesia, Mexico,
Myanmar, Nepal, Pakistan, the Philippines, Thailand and Viet Nam)
indicates that national and household levels of solid-fuel use are highly
correlated (R2 =0.75). It should be noted, however, that this relationship
holds true when solid fuels are not heavily used in industry. This correlation was used to estimate use of solid fuel by households in nine coun1442 Comparative Quantification of Health Risks
tries (Afghanistan, Algeria, Egypt, the Islamic Republic of Iran, Lebanon,
the Libyan Arab Jamahiriya, Morocco, Tunisia and Turkey) where only
information on national use of solid fuel was available. For three countries (Angola, the Democratic Republic of the Congo and the Sudan), in
which a large fraction of the total national energy consumed (>70%)
comprised biomass fuels (World Resources Institute 2003), household
use of solid fuel was assumed to be 100%. In other countries, including
Bangladesh, Indonesia, Myanmar, Nepal, the Philippines, Thailand, Viet
Nam and Pakistan (FAO 1997a, 1997b; Government of Indonesia 1995,
1996a; Government of Pakistan 1997), aggregate data on annual residential fuel consumption are available. In these cases, the percentage of
households using solid fuels was estimated according to the quantity of
fuel consumed.
The fraction of the population of each subregion covered by the
countries for which some data were available, and the prevalence of
solid-fuel use according to these data are given in Table 18.3. Data on
specific types of solid fuel (i.e. use of coal vs biomass) are limited to
India and China, but this factor is also likely to be important in other
countries in which no estimates were made, including South Africa and
Pakistan. 
2.4 A model to predict national use of solid fuel
Using known values from the database of households using solid fuel, a
statistical model was built to predict national use of solid fuel according
to a number of development parameters. The model was then applied to
countries where no data on household fuel use existed. This method
also allowed for the estimation of statistical uncertainty (i.e. excluding
uncertainty in available data and the validity of model) surrounding each
prediction.4
As a country develops, households gradually switch from using solid
fuels to using cleaner liquid and/or gaseous fuels. Although the picture
is often more complex at local and household levels, it is assumed here
that this generally holds true over the long term on a subregional scale,
a trend well-established by current, albeit cross-sectional, international
comparisons. After a certain level of economic growth has been achieved,
it is assumed that countries will shift away from cooking entirely with
solid fuels. The use of solid fuel for heating may continue, however, especially in areas that are rich in coal and wood.
For countries for which data were not available, a model based on
the parameters described in Table 18.4 was used with stepwise linear
regression. With a gross national product (GNP) of US$4420 per capita in 1999, Brazil was the richest country in the database to have significant levels of cooking with solid fuels (27% of households). To avoid
extrapolating the model to areas where it may be inappropriate, estimates were made only for countries with a GNP of <US$5000 per capita
in 1999. All countries with a GNP of >US$5000 per capita in 1999 were
assumed to have made a complete transition to clean household-cooking
systems, either with cleaner liquid or gaseous fuels, or electricity or,
where solid fuel was still used for cooking or heating, to fully ventilated
appliances.
As use of traditional fuel (as a percentage of national energy use) is
highly correlated with GNP per capita, stepwise linear regression eliminates GNP per capita when both variables are entered together. If use of
traditional fuel is not entered, it is essentially replaced by GNP per capita
in the model, with little impact on model fit or standard error (Table
18.5). Two models to predict fuel use were assessed, one employing GNP
per capita and the other use of traditional fuel (as a percentage of
national energy use) as predictor variables. Use of traditional fuel, which
includes use of fuel-wood, bagasse (biomass remaining after processing
sugar-cane), charcoal, animal wastes, agricultural residues, and other
vegetable biomass wastes, is expressed as a percentage of total fuel use
at the national (as opposed to the household) level, on an energy-equivalent basis. Like household use of solid fuel, use of traditional fuel at the
national level is highly correlated with GNP per capita (Figures 18.1 and
18.2).
Information on GNP per capita is more reliable, is updated more
routinely, and is available at the national level for nearly all countries.
Therefore, we used the model including GNP per capita as a predictor,
rather than the model using use of traditional fuel. The final model is
shown in Table 18.6 and includes percentage of the rural population,
GNP per capita (log-transformed), petroleum use per capita, and location within the EMR subregions (entered as a dummy variable). Other potential variables were dropped from the model in stepwise linear
regression.
This model was used to predict percentages of households using solid
fuel in all countries where these values were unknown (see Figure 18.3).
In order to force the percentage of households using solid fuel to lie
between 0% and 100%, estimates for the 23 countries with predicted
values of <0 or >100 were converted to 0 and 100, respectively.
Known (for all countries in the household fuel-use database) and predicted estimates of use of solid fuel at the country level were aggregated
into subregional estimates of household solid-fuel use (Table 18.7).
The subregions with the least coverage are those that have the highest
levels of economic development, i.e. those subregions that are least likely
to have high proportions of household solid-fuel use because people
have, for the most part, already shifted to cleaner fuels and cooking
technologies.
We assumed that the fraction of the population exposed is the same
as the fraction of households using solid fuel. This assumption is likely to underestimate exposure since solid-fuel-using households are more
likely to be rural and of low socioeconomic status, and are thus likely
to have more members than the subregional average.
2.5 Assigning ventilation factors
Since people in different parts of the world use different cooking and
heating appliances and have different types of housing, ventilation must
also be taken into account when estimating exposure. Here, the term
“ventilation” encompasses both ventilation-related characteristics of the
stove (such as the presence of a chimney that vents to the outside of the
house) and characteristics of the kitchen (building material, architectural
features that influence indoor air quality, location of the kitchen with
relation to living area, etc.).
Although we had no data on ventilation conditions according to subregion, we hypothesized that ventilation was a function of climate and
development (UNCHS 1996). As described above, countries with a GNP
per capita of >US$5000 were essentially assigned an estimated exposure
of 0, that is, any use of solid fuel in the household was assumed to be
undertaken in fully-vented appliances, with no re-entry of the pollution
into the household. In the absence of further information (as described
below), all other countries were assigned a ventilation factor of 1.0.
In countries of eastern Europe and the former Soviet Union, a long
history of household use of solid fuel under cold climatic conditions
and relatively high standards of living, before the recent economic
decline, led to the development of energy technologies with far fewer
indoor emissions and, consequently, less exposure per unit of solid fuel
burned. Therefore, we set the ventilation factor at 0.2 for EUR-B and
EUR-C.
In China, the widespread national improved-stove programme has disseminated cooking stoves with chimneys to three-quarters of rural households using solid fuel since 1981 (Goldemberg et al. 2000; Smith et al.
1993), resulting in decreased effective exposure. The ventilation factor
for China was set at 0.25 for child health outcomes, because even welloperating, improved biomass stoves with chimneys are still responsible
for some exposure (Sinton et al. 1995). We set China’s ventilation factor
at 0.5 for adult health outcomes, as current disease patterns for adults
partly reflect exposure before the introduction of improved stoves. India,
the only other country with a long-term national stove-improvement programme, has had only mixed success, with relatively low stove lifetimes
and national coverage (NCAER 2002). The ventilation factor was therefore maintained at 1.0 for India.
Tables 18.8 and 18.9 detail estimated exposures as defined above for
children aged <5 years and for adults. Separate estimates of exposure
resulting from use of coal are presented in Table 18.10 for adults only,
as adults are affected by chronic health outcomes (see section 3)
2.6 Quantitative and qualitative sources of uncertainty
Estimates of use of solid fuel for countries in the household fuel-use
database were arbitrarily assigned an uncertainty range of 5%. The
exposure classification system used here is binary (exposed to solid fuels
or not exposed), which is consistent with the available epidemiological
literature. In reality, exposure to indoor air pollution from use of solid
fuel results in a wide range of exposures, which vary according to different types and quality of fuel and stove housing characteristics (e.g.
ventilation and size), cooking and heating methods, differences in timeactivity patterns (time spent within the household and in close proximity to the pollution source) and season (Saksena et al. 1992). Since
the distribution of exposures is continuous, exposures would best be
characterized as a continuous outcome, or at least better characterized
by multiple categories. As a result, the above binary categorization and
uncertainty values significantly underestimate the true uncertainty in
levels of exposure. In addition, the need to use the fuel-prediction model
for countries without data obviously introduces uncertainty, only part of
which may be reflected in the variance of the results obtained from the
model.
3. Estimating risk factor–disease
relationships
3.1 Health outcomes: evidence for causality and
inclusion criteria
Health outcomes caused by indoor exposure to smoke from use of solid
fuel were chosen after a review of the epidemiological evidence available
for each end-point, using electronic databases, including Medline
and TCMLARS (Traditional Chinese Medical Literature Analysis and
Retrieval System, an electronic database of Chinese journals). In addition, given that a large body of evidence comes from developing countries, literature was also obtained from other researchers and reputable
developing-country journals not currently indexed in international databases. Only articles written or abstracted in English were used, except
for articles on lung cancer, for which both the Chinese and the English literature were accessed, since, to our knowledge, only in China has there
been significant use of coal in unvented household devices in recent
decades.
GENERAL ASSESSMENT OF CAUSALITY
The strength of the evidence for each end-point was determined on the
basis of a structured assessment of causality, using Bradford Hill’s criteria for causality, including temporal relationship, strength of association,
specificity, the presence of a dose–response relationship, biological plausibility, coherence, the existence of experimental evidence and consistency of association.
As specificity, dose–response relationships, and experimental evidence
are often difficult to assess for environmental exposures and health outcomes with multiple causes or long latency periods, we used the epidemiological evidence in conjunction with available information on
emissions, exposures and mechanisms for indoor air pollution (Smith et
al. 2000; Zelikoff et al. 2003). Three health outcomes were determined
to have strong enough evidence to be included: ALRI, COPD and lung
cancer (Table 18.11). Information on assessing causality for these outcomes is given in section 3.3 and excluded outcomes are discussed in
section 3.2.
Children aged >5 years (of school-age) were excluded as they spend
less time in the house than women and children aged <5 years; this is a
conservative assumption as there is some exposure of this group,
although levels are unknown on a global scale (Ezzati and Kammen
2001; Saksena et al. 1992). Because of the limitations of the available
epidemiological studies, only risks in young children (aged <5 years) and
adults were included. Available data indicate that men are also affected
by those outcomes considered for women, but presumably at lower risks
than women because of lower exposures. Adults aged 15–30 years were
excluded because the chronic diseases of concern (COPD and lung
cancer) have not yet become manifest in this group. Obviously, however,
development of these diseases in later years is partly caused by exposures
at these and younger ages.
1452 Comparative Quantification of Health Risks
Table 18.11 Diseases associated with use of solid fuels and populations
affected that were included in the analysis
Disease Population affected
Acute lower respiratory infections (ALRI) Children aged <5 years
Chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD) Females and males aged ≥30 years
Lung cancer (coal use only) Females and males aged ≥30 years
3.2 Excluded health outcomes
OUTCOMES WITH INSUFFICIENT EVIDENCE
A number of important diseases that are potentially associated with use
of solid fuels have not been included in this analysis owing to insufficient or lack of direct evidence on causality. Lack of inclusion does not
necessarily imply inconclusive findings. Rather, it refers to a relatively
small set of findings, suggesting that additional, carefully conducted
studies are needed to strengthen the evidence base.
Asthma
On the basis of the usual measures (concentrations of small particles,
PM2.5), typical exposures to indoor smoke from use of solid fuels are
much higher than those for urban outdoor pollution (García-Marcos
et al. 1999) and ETS (Strachan and Cook 1998), with which asthma has
been frequently associated. In addition, a study of children aged <5 years
in Malaysia found increased risk associated with the burning of mosquito coils, another important indoor source of PM2.5 (Azizi et al. 1995).
Studies in China (Xu et al. 1996a) and Kenya (Mohamed et al. 1995)
have quantitatively associated asthma in children of school age and in
adults with various measures of indoor pollution from solid-fuel use. As
the reported background rate is low in most developing countries,
however, asthma contributes relatively little to the total burden of deaths
or DALYs from indoor air pollution.
Cataracts and other visual impairments
Two case–control studies in India have found an increased risk of
cataracts among people using biomass fuel; Mohan et al. (1989) determined an odds ratio of 1.6; Zodpey and Ughade (1999) found an adjusted
odds ratio of 2.4. Evaluation of the National Family Health Survey of
India (NFHS 1995) found a somewhat lower rate for partial blindness
(odds ratio of 1.3; Mishra et al. 1999a), but no significant difference for
total blindness. There is also evidence that exposure to ETS is associated
with cataracts (West 1992) and animal studies show that cataracts can
be caused by wood smoke (Rao et al. 1995; Shalini et al. 1994).
Indoor air pollution may also be linked to blindness through trachoma (Prüss and Mariotti 2000). Two unadjusted studies in the United
Republic of Tanzania found such a link (Taylor and West 1989; West
and Lynch 1989) although another in Ethiopia found cooking in a central
room to be protective, perhaps through reduction of flies (Sahlu and
Larson 1992).
Perinatal effects
One study in India found an adjusted excess risk of stillbirth of 50%
among women using biomass fuels during pregnancy (Mavalankar et al.
1991), and two Chinese studies of urban ambient pollution, from the
Kirk R. Smith et al. 1453
same group of researchers, also found a strong relationship between
concentrations of particulates and pre-term delivery (Xu et al. 1995)
and low birth weight (Wang et al. 1997). Low birth weight was also
found to be associated with household exposure to biomass smoke in
Guatemala (Boy et al. 2002). Intrauterine mortality, low birth weight,
prematurity, and early infant death have been significantly associated
with urban outdoor pollution at much lower concentrations than those
typically found in households that use biomass (Bobak 2000; Loomis et
al. 1999; Pereira et al. 1998; Ritz and Yu 1999; Scram 1999; Woodruff
et al. 1997). Exposure of non-smoking pregnant women to ETS has been
associated with low birth weight in a meta-analysis of 17 studies
(Windham et al. 1999a), with low cognitive development (Johnson et al.
1999), but not with spontaneous abortion (Windham et al. 1999b).
Low birth weight is a risk factor for a number of childhood (Walsh
1993) and, probably, adult (Barker 1997) diseases, not just those of the
respiratory system. The potential pathways by which indoor cooking
smoke may cause low birth weight are given in Figure 18.4. Although
this mechanism seems likely to be important in some parts of the world, at present it is difficult to provide a quantitative estimate of the potential burden, and it is not attempted here.
Tuberculosis
Recent studies in India and Mexico have suggested that indoor air pollution from use of solid fuel may be a risk factor for active tuberculosis.
A statistically significant relationship has been found between reported
use of biomass fuel and incidence of tuberculosis in 260000 adults
aged >20 years. Indeed, women in households using biomass fuels were
found to be 2.7 (95% CI 1.9–4.0) times more likely to have tuberculosis than women in households using cleaner fuels, even after correction
for a range of socioeconomic factors (Mishra et al. 1999b). In addition,
an unadjusted but significant odds ratio of 2.5 has been reported for
clinically-confirmed tuberculosis in adult male and female householders
aged 16–60 years using wood or dung cakes as fuel (Gupta and Mathur
1997). Although these studies were not able to address smoking as a possible confounder, two studies in Mexico City have found an association
between exposure to wood smoke and incidence of tuberculosis, after
taking smoking into account (Perez-Padilla et al. 1996, 2001). A study
in China also found exposure to outdoor air pollution to be associated
with tuberculosis (Xu et al. 1995). Animal studies have shown that wood
smoke causes immune suppression in the respiratory system (Thomas
and Zelikoff 1999; Zelikoff 1994).
Other health effects not included
• Interstitial lung disease has been associated with long-term exposures
in several studies (Dhar and Pathania 1991; Gold 2000; Ramage
et al. 1988; Sandoval et al. 1993).
• Early studies in Africa seemed to implicate wood smoke as a cause of
nasopharyngeal cancer, but this association was not borne out by later
studies in Asia (Smith 1987; Smith and Liu 1994).
• Two studies in Brazil have shown increased risk of upper aerodigestive tract cancers, with adjusted odds ratios of 2.7 (Pintos et al. 1998)
and 2.5 (Franco et al. 1989).
• An association has been shown with cervical neoplasia among HPVinfected women in Honduras, with an adjusted odds ratio of 5.7 after
35 years or more of cooking over an open fire (Velema et al. 2002).
• Ischaemic heart disease has been associated with exposure to outdoor
particulate air pollution (Ponka and Virtanen 1996; Pope et al. 1992;
Schwartz 1993; Schwartz and Dockery 1992; Schwartz and Morris
1995) and ETS (Steenland et al. 1998) in some studies, both at much
lower levels of exposure than for indoor air pollution (see chapter 17).
Kirk R. Smith et al. 1455
EXCLUDED OUTCOMES ASSOCIATED WITH USE OF SOLID FUEL, BUT NOT
CAUSED BY EXPOSURE TO AIR POLLUTION
The use of solid fuels for household cooking and heating involves a range
of activities with potential health implications that are separate from
those involving the pollution created. The most important involve the
harvesting of the two major types of fuel.
• The harvesting of biomass in rural settings in developing countries
may involve regular carriage of heavy loads for long distances, with
consequent physical strain and food energy demands, along with
exposure to such hazards as snake-bite, leeches and assault (crime).
Women and children typically bear the greatest burden of such harvesting, although there is much variation across the world.
• Coal mining is one of the most hazardous occupations in the world,
particularly in developing countries in small mines from which much
household fuel is obtained.
In addition, the extra time taken to harvest, store, and prepare solid
fuels is time that is potentially deducted from other pursuits that are
associated with health benefits, such as child care or the generation of
the household income.
Considering that the counterfactual distribution is cooking with nonsolid fuels (rather than no cooking at all), there are also categories of
health risk that are avoided by the use of solid fuels:
• fires and explosions related to household use of liquid and gaseous
fuels;
• poisoning caused by ingestion of household kerosene;
• risk inherent in the operation of the national and international petroleum fuel cycles required to provide liquid and gaseous fuels;
• risks involved in providing electricity for household cooking, such as
coal mining, air pollution from power plants, accidents involving
nuclear and hydroelectric dams, etc.; and
• additional risk of mosquito-borne diseases owing to absence of repellence from household smoke produced by solid fuel.
In its current form, the system limits of this comparative risk assessment (CRA) do not encompass any of these health effects, positive or
negative, that are not directly caused by exposure of humans to pollution in the household.
EXCLUDED OUTCOMES ASSOCIATED WITH SPECIALIZED AIRBORNE PRODUCTS
OF INDOOR COMBUSTION
There are several related sources of indoor pollution not covered by this
analysis that may be locally important in some countries. However, too
1456 Comparative Quantification of Health Risks
few data are available regarding exposures to extrapolate these risks
to global burdens, although we suggest that these sources represent
potential research topics, as well as priorities for determining exposure
distributions, in order to improve the estimated burden of indoor air
pollution.
• Smoke from cooking oil: studies in China (including the Province of
Taiwan) show relative risks for lung cancer of 3–5 for Chinese-style
cooking in a wok with certain cooking oils (Ko 2000; Zhong et al.
1999b).
• Exposures to trace quantities of toxic elements resulting from indoor
use of coal in China and elsewhere: significant and widespread
impacts from exposures to fluorine and arsenic have been reported in
China (Finkelman et al. 1999) and can be expected to occur wherever
coal fuels are contaminated with such toxic elements.
• Smoke from incense and mosquito coils, which have been associated
with ill-health in some Asian studies (Azizi et al. 1995).
3.3 Evidence and exposure–risk relationships
The estimates of relative risk5 and confidence intervals used for ALRI,
COPD and lung cancer were derived through formal meta-analyses of
the available literature.
Searches of the scientific literature were conducted using the Medline
computerized bibliographic database, review of bibliographies from
previously-retrieved articles and personal communications. In some
cases, the authors of articles that were lacking data that were of interest for this analysis were contacted and asked for clarification, and specific requests for information were sent to researchers in this field.
Medline searches were conducted using the following key words:
• For ALRI: indoor air pollution, household fuel, smoke, acute respiratory infections (ARI), pneumonia and ALRI
• For COPD: indoor air, fuel, COPD, chronic obstructive lung disease
(COLD) and chronic bronchitis
• For lung cancer: indoor, air, fuel and lung cancer
To be eligible for inclusion in the meta-analysis, studies had to fulfil
the following criteria:
• to be a primary study, not a re-analysis or review;
• to examine some proxy for exposure to indoor smoke from the use
of solid fuels for cooking and/or heating purposes;
• to report an odds ratio and its variance, or sufficient data with which
to estimate them; and
Kirk R. Smith et al. 1457
• to be written or abstracted in English. Additionally, for lung cancer
only, a Chinese colleague assisted in a comprehensive search of the
Chinese literature, extraction of the relevant data and translation.
We considered both fixed- and random-effects models for the metaanalysis. As the results from both were similar, we used those from the
fixed-effects model only. Owing to heterogeneity within studies, we performed sensitivity analyses by stratifying the studies by potential sources
of heterogeneity, including assessment of exposure and adjustment for
confounders. We did not use a random-effects model, even when statistical significance for heterogeneity was present, for the following reasons.
• Random-effects models assume that studies are selected from a population with a single underlying variance. This would be violated
given the heterogeneity among the studies in measuring exposure.
• Random-effects models assign the same weight to small and large
studies. This would be problematic for the studies of this analysis
because the number of cases ranged from 45 to 500.
Smoking is an important risk factor for the diseases associated with
indoor smoke from use of solid fuel, especially lung cancer and COPD.
At present, information on the combined effects of smoking and use of
solid fuel is rare. To avoid possible overestimation of the burden of
disease, therefore, attributable fractions for lung cancer and COPD
caused by use of solid fuel were applied to disease burdens remaining
after removal of the burden attributable to smoking. This is conservative in that some of the effect attributable to smoking could also be
attributed to use of solid fuel. To ensure internal consistency within the
CRA project, burdens attributable to smoking were obtained from
chapter 11. Globally, about 51% and 62%, for men and women respectively, of the total burden of COPD is not attributable to tobacco.
ACUTE LOWER RESPIRATORY INFECTIONS
A number of studies in developing countries (Argentina, Brazil, the
Gambia, India, Kenya, Nepal, Nigeria, South Africa, the United Republic of Tanzania and Zimbabwe) have quantified the relative risk of ALRI
for children in households that burn biomass (Armstrong and Campbell
1991; Campbell 1997; Cerqueiro et al. 1990; Collings et al. 1990; de
Francisco et al. 1993; Ezzati and Kammen 2001; Johnson and Aderele
1992; Kossove 1982; Mtango et al. 1992; O’Dempsey et al. 1996;
Pandey et al. 1989b; Shah et al. 1994; Victora et al. 1994). Some work
has also been done to identify possible mechanisms in the developing
countries (Verma and Thakur 1995).
Studies among native Americans (Navajos in the south-western United
States of America) show a strong and significant association between
ALRI and use of wood stoves, at much lower levels of indoor pollution
than found in developing countries (Morris et al. 1990; Robin et al.
1458 Comparative Quantification of Health Risks
1996). There is a larger group of studies that show various childhood
respiratory symptoms (e.g. cough, wheezing) to be associated with exposure to smoke from solid fuel, but do not provide sufficient evidence to
calculate odds ratios of ALRI itself.
As all studies included here used either ARI or ALRI, or death caused
by ARI or ALRI, in children aged <5 years as a health outcome, we only
estimated the burden of disease for children in this age group. A recent
study in Kenya (Ezzati and Kammen 2001) found associations between
use of solid fuels and ARI in adults (both men and women), suggesting
that, once time–activity patterns and spatial dispersion of smoke have
been taken into account, men and women may have similar patterns of
exposure–response.
A single statistical analysis of all 15 studies identified (Table 18.12)
was not appropriate because of the heterogeneous exposure variables
and the diverse analytical strategies used by the investigators, especially
with respect to potential confounding factors. To address this diversity,
different subgroups of these studies were used to conduct several metaanalyses, the results of which were remarkably consistent; pooled relative risk estimates increased with improved precision of exposure
measure.6
C
