Health impact of air pollution Around the world , nine out of 10 people breathe unhealthy air . Air pollution be now the biggest environmental risk for early death , responsible for as many as 5 million premature death each year from heart attack , stroke , diabetes and respiratory disease . That ’ s more than the death from AIDS , tuberculosis and malaria combine . Children , the elderly , people with exist disease , and minority and low-income community be particularly vulnerable to adverse health outcome and economic impact , such as missed work day , from exposure to air pollution . Research suggest that long term exposure to some pollutant increase the risk of emphysema more than smoke a pack of cigarette a day . And recent study show air pollution can impact mental health , worker productivity and even stock market performance . To understand the best way to develop solution , it ’ s important to better understand this invisible threat . What we typically think of as `` air pollution '' be actually a mixture of small particle , include the below . Particulate matter ( PM10 , PM2.5 ) Particulate matter ( PM ) be make up of small airborne particle like dust , soot and drop of liquid . The majority of PM in urban area be form directly from burning of fossil fuel by power plant , automobile , non-road equipment and industrial facility . Other source be dust , diesel emission and secondary particle formation from gas and vapor . Coarse particulate matter ( PM10 , particles less than 10 micron in diameter ) be know to cause nasal and upper respiratory tract health problem . Fine particle ( PM2.5 , particles less than 2.5 micron in diameter ) penetrate deeper into the lung and cause heart attack , stroke , asthma , and bronchitis , as well as premature death from heart ailment , lung disease and cancer . Studies show that higher PM2.5 exposure can impair brain development in child . Black carbon ( BC ) Black carbon be one of the component of particulate matter and come from burn fuel ( especially diesel , wood , and coal ) . Most air pollution regulation focus on PM2.5 , but exposure to black carbon be a serious health threat as well . Populations with higher exposure to black carbon over a long period be at a higher risk for heart attack and stroke . In addition , black carbon be associate with hypertension , asthma , chronic obstructive pulmonary disease , bronchitis , and a variety of type of cancer . Nitrogen oxide ( NO and NO2 ) Nitrogen oxide ( NO ) and nitrogen dioxide ( NO2 ) be produce primarily by the transportation sector . NO be rapidly convert to NO2 in sunlight . NOx ( a combination of NO and NO2 ) be form in high concentration around roadway and can result in development and exacerbation of asthma and bronchitis , and can lead to a higher risk of heart disease . Ozone ( O3 ) Ozone high in the atmosphere can protect us from ultraviolet radiation . But ozone at ground level ( where it be part of what be commonly call smog ) be a well-established respiratory irritant . Ozone be form in the atmosphere through reaction of volatile organic compound and nitrogen oxide , both of which be form as a result of combustion of fossil fuel . Short-term exposure to ozone can cause chest pain , coughing and throat irritation , while long term exposure can lead to decreased lung function and cause chronic obstructive pulmonary disease . In addition , ozone exposure can aggravate exist lung disease . Sulfur dioxide ( SO2 ) SO2 be emit into the air by the burning of fossil fuel that contain sulfur . Coal , metal extraction and smelting , ship engine , and heavy equipment diesel equipment burn fuel that contain sulfur . Sulfur dioxide cause eye irritation , worsen asthma , increase susceptibility to respiratory infection and impact the cardiovascular system . When SO2 combine with water , it form sulfuric acid ; this be the main component of acid rain , a know contributor to deforestation . Health impact of air pollution in Canada The Government of Canada estimate that 14,600 premature death per year in Canada can be link to air pollution from fine particulate matter , nitrogen dioxide and ozone , as outline in the technical report Health Impacts of Air Pollution in Canada – Estimates of Morbidity Outcomes and Premature Mortalities - 2019 Report . In term of annual morbidity outcome , the number of asthma symptom day reach 2.7 million , while the count of acute respiratory symptom day amount to 35 million . The total economic valuation of the health impact attributable to air pollution in Canada be $ 114B per year ( base on 2015 currency ) . Health Canada 's analysis make use of the best available health and air quality data for Canada . Ambient level for the pollutant be determine from a combination of : • satellite measurement ; • ground measurement ; and • air quality computer model . Maps be create to show : • air pollution level across Canada for each pollutant ; and • the distribution of the population across Canada . The exposure of Canadians to air pollution be then estimate by combine the air pollution and population map . Health Canada use a computer model call the Air Quality Benefits Assessment Tool ( AQBAT ) . The AQBAT model include mathematical equation that show association between air pollution and health effect . These equation be base on robust scientific finding . The AQBAT model produce an estimate of the number of premature death ( and other health outcome ) in Canada . The scientific method use be similar to those use by other health organization , both in Canada and internationally . All conclude that air pollution have significant impact on human health . The technical report Health Impacts of Air Pollution in Canada – Estimates of Morbidity Outcomes and Premature Mortalities - 2019 Report be available for download . For additional information on how the Government of Canada estimate air pollution health impact , please contact hc.air.sc @ canada.ca . What be the health risk of air pollution ? Air pollution can affect : • breathing and lung condition , such as : o asthma o allergy o chronic obstructive pulmonary disease ( COPD ) • heart condition , such as : o angina o arrhythmia o heart attack o heart failure o hypertension It can also increase the risk of stroke . Some pollutant and bacteria find mainly indoors be relate to specific risk , such as : • asbestosis • Legionnaires ' disease Your reaction to air pollution depend on : • the type and amount of contaminant you be expose to • your overall health • your age What be the symptom you may experience because of air pollution ? If you be suffer from the health effect of air pollution , symptom can include : • tiredness • headache or dizziness • cough and sneeze • wheezing or difficulty breathe • more mucous in the nose or throat • dry or irritated eye , nose , throat and skin You may notice these symptom after a few minute or hour and then feel better after leave the affected area . This may be more noticeable if you have not spend much time in affected area . For example , you may notice a difference after a vacation . People with lung or heart disease may experience more frequent and severe symptom . They may also need more medication to reduce these symptom . People with lung problem People with asthma or chronic obstructive pulmonary disease ( COPD ) may notice that they : • have more mucous • cough and wheeze more • experience shortness of breath People with heart problem People with heart failure , heart rhythm problem or angina may experience : • light-headedness • a chest or arm pain • irregular heart beat • swell in the ankle and foot • an increase in shortness of breath Who be most at risk for air pollution health effect ? People who be most at risk for health effect be : • older adult • young child • those who be active outdoors • those who have exist heart condition • those who live near industry or busy roadway • those who have exist breathing or lung problem and illness Lung condition Lung condition that put people at risk for air pollution health effect include : • asthma • lung cancer • chronic obstructive pulmonary disease ( COPD ) o this be sometimes call chronic bronchitis or emphysema Heart condition People who have previously suffer a heart attack be at risk . Other heart condition that put people at risk include : • heart failure ( your heart be too weak to move blood around the body ) • angina ( chest pain that happen when your heart do not get enough oxygen-rich blood ) • heart rhythm problem like arrhythmia ( your heart either beat too fast , too slow or be irregular ) Those with diabetes be also at risk for air pollution health effect . This be because people with diabetes be also likely to have a heart condition . Young child Young child breathe in more air in relation to their body weight than people in other age group . This mean that they breathe in more contaminant , so air pollution affect them more . The body ’ s defence and lung system be also not fully develop yet . Therefore , young child can not easily fight off sickness that may result from air pollution . Older adult Older adult may have weaker lung , heart and defence system . They may also have an undiagnosed lung or heart condition . Those who be active outdoors People who play sport or do hard work outdoors breathe faster and more deeply than others . This allow more air pollution to enter the lung . Those who live near industry or busy roadway People who live near industry or busy roadway be closer to major source of air pollution . They may be expose to more pollutant from these source . What should you do if you think you be suffer from health problem relate to air quality ? If you think that you be suffer from health problem relate to air pollution , it be important to : • keep track of when you get symptom and when they go away • discuss your symptom with your health care provider This will help your health care provider determine if your symptom be relate to • air quality problem , include indoor air quality issue • another health issue If you be suffer from poor indoor air quality at work , you should : • discuss your concern with your supervisor or health and safety representative • contact your provincial or territorial government for information and advice on workplace health and safety Health Effects of Air Pollutants on Vulnerable Populations Research have show that some people be more susceptible than others to air pollutant . These group include child , pregnant woman , older adult , and individual with pre-existing heart and lung disease . People in low socioeconomic neighborhood and community may be more vulnerable to air pollution because of many factor . Proximity to industrial source of air pollution , underlie health problem , poor nutrition , stress , and other factor can contribute to increase health impact in these community . There be a need for greater understanding of the factor that may influence whether a population or age group be at increase risk of health effect from air pollution . In addition , advance to analytical approach use to study the health effect from air pollution will improve exposure estimate for healthy and at-risk group . The research by EPA scientist and others inform the required review of the primary National Ambient Air Quality Standards ( NAAQS ) , which be do with the development of Integrated Science Assessments ( ISAs ) . These ISAs be mandate by Congress every five year to assess the current state of the science on criterion air pollutant and determine if the standard provide adequate protection to public health . Research be focus on address four area : • Identifying and characterize whether there be key reproductive factor and critical stage of development that be impact by air pollution exposure ; • Determining the role of acute and chronic sociodemographic factor in air pollution health disparity ; • Understanding how diet modifies responses to air pollution ; • Evaluating long-term lifestyle and chronic disease effect on air pollution-induced respiratory and cardiovascular response A multi-disciplinary team of investigator be coordinate epidemiological , human observational , and basic toxicological research to assess the effect of air pollution in at-risk population and develop strategy to protect these population , particularly those with pre-existing disease . The result from these product will improve risk assessment by clarify the role of modify factor such as psychosocial stress ( e.g . noise ) and diet , and determine the impact of individual susceptibility on the relationship between air pollutant exposure and health . Long-Term and Short-Term Effects from Exposure to Air Pollutants People can experience exposure to vary concentration of air pollution . Poor air quality can impact individual for a short period of time during the day , or more frequently during a give day . Exposure to pollutant can also occur over multiple day , week or month due to seasonal air pollution , such as increased ozone during the summer or particulate matter from woodstoves during the winter . The health impact of air pollution exposure depend on the duration and concentration , and the health status of the affected population . Studies be need to increase knowledge of the exposure duration and the possible cumulative increase in risk . The research be focus on three main area : • Short-term peak exposure , such as wildfire , traffic-related source , or other episodic event ; • Intermittent and cumulative exposure ; • Mechanisms underlie the exposure risk Researchers be evaluate the health response of intermittent multiple day versus one-day air pollution exposure in controlled human exposure , animal , and in vitro model and associate cellular and molecular mechanism . They be employ population-based model and electronic health record to assess the health effect of short-term and long-term exposure and identify population at greatest risk of health effect . The work be improve our understanding of the possible cumulative effect of multiple short-term peak exposure and the relationship of these exposure to longer-term exposure and risk . Multipollutant Exposures and Changes in Environmental Conditions EPA research be provide information to understand how individual may respond to two or more pollutant or mixture and how environmental condition may impact air quality . While risk estimate for exposure to individual criterion air pollutant such as PM and ozone be well establish , the acute and cumulative effect of combination of pollutant be not well understood . In addition , research be need to determine how change in the environment affect both pollutant formation and subsequent responsiveness to exposure in healthy and susceptible individual . The research be focus on three specific question : • What be the role of temperature and photochemical age on the health impact of wildfire smoke and air pollution mixture ? • What be the effect of change environmental condition ( i.e. , temperature and humidity ) on responsiveness to air pollution ? • Does prior pollutant exposure modify responsiveness to subsequent exposure ? The integrate , multi-disciplinary research include : • Epidemiologic analysis of environmental influence on morbidity and mortality in population , • Simulations of change environmental condition in multi-pollutant formation in atmospheric chamber study couple with clinical and toxicological assessment in healthy and at-risk population , • Evaluation of pre-exposure as a modify effect on subsequent exposure The result be reveal how change in environmental condition affect pollutant formation and subsequent health impact in at-risk population . The research finding be inform EPA ’ s Integrated Science Assessments for criterion air pollutant and assist with future regulatory decision on the National Ambient Air Quality Standards ( NAAQS ) . Leveraging Big Data for Innovations in Health Science EPA be at the cut edge of health science , use electronic health record , novel data system , tissue-like advance cellular model , molecular approach , and animal model to evaluate the health impact of air pollution . Researchers be use these powerful new technique to identify factor that may increase sensitivity and vulnerability to air pollution effect . The research be build capacity for future risk assessment and regulatory analysis that go beyond traditional line of evidence to more clearly define population and lifestages at increase risk of health effect from air pollution . To continue to protect public health from poor air quality , researcher must consider new epidemiological , toxicological and clinical approach to understand the health risk of poor air quality and the biological mechanism responsible for these risk . At the center of these new research approach be an explosion of data availability and methodological approach for handle large clinical and molecular datasets , also know as '' big data . '' While data of increase size , depth , and complexity have accelerate research for many industry and scientific field , big data be sometimes less recognize for the impact it be have on environmental health study . Increasingly , researcher be able to examine vulnerable population with unprecedented precision and detail while also evaluate hundred of thousand of molecular biomarkers in order to understand biological mechanism associate with exposure . Health Effects of Wildfire Smoke Larger and more intense wildfire be create the potential for greater smoke production and chronic exposure in the United States , particularly in the West . Wildfires increase air pollution in surround area and can affect regional air quality . The health effect of wildfire smoke can range from eye and respiratory tract irritation to more serious disorder , include reduce lung function , exacerbation of asthma and heart failure , and premature death . Children , pregnant woman , and the elderly be especially vulnerable to smoke exposure . Emissions from wildfire be know to cause increased visit to hospital and clinic by those expose to smoke . It be important to more fully understand the human health effect associate with short- and long-term exposure to smoke from wildfire as well as prescribed fire , together refer to as wildland fire . EPA be conduct research to advance understanding of the health effect from different type of fire as well as combustion phase . Researchers want to know : • What be the full extent of health effect from smoke exposure ? • Who be most at risk ? • Are there difference in health effect from different wildfire fuel type or combustion phase ( burn versus flame ) ? • What strategy and approach be most effective in protect public health ? • What be the environmental , social and economic impact of wildfire emission ? Public Health Intervention and Communications Strategies Many community throughout the United States face challenge in provide advice to resident about how best to protect their health when they be expose to elevated concentration of air pollutant from motor vehicle and industrial emission and other source of combustion , include wildland fire smoke . Researchers be study intervention strategy to reduce the health impact from exposure to air pollution as well as way to effectively communicate these health risk . To translate the science for use in public health communication and community empowerment , EPA be collaborate with other federal agency , such as the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention ( CDC ) and the National Heart , Lung , and Blood Institute ( NHLBI ) , and state and local agency and tribe . The objective be to identify way to lower air pollution exposure or mitigate the biological response at individual , community or ecosystem level , and ultimately evaluate whether such intervention have benefit as measure by indicator of health , well-being or economics . Studies be evaluate the interaction between behavior and social and economic factor to more thoroughly understand how these factor may influence health and well-being outcome , which can inform effective and consistent health risk messaging . EPA set National Ambient Air Quality Standards ( NAAQS ) for six principal criterion air pollutants—nitrogen oxide , sulfur oxide , particulate matter , carbon monoxide , ozone and lead—all of which have be show to be harmful to public health and the environment . The Agency ’ s Integrated Science Assessments ( ISAs ) form the scientific foundation for the review of the NAAQS standard by provide the primary ( human health-based ) assessment and secondary ( welfare-based , e.g . ecology , visibility , material ) assessment . The ISAs be assessment of the state of the science on the criterion pollutant . They be conduct as mandate under the Clean Air Act . AIR POLLUTION be a major blot on our environmental health scorecard : in some Western country , it be estimate that car emission kill twice as many people as car crashes.1 In both urban Australia and New Zealand , the main source of air pollution be motor vehicle emission , wood smoke from home heating , and industrial pollution . Bushfires be another important source of air pollution in some part of Australia . In New Zealand , an estimated 900 death per year be attributable to air pollution ( 2 % of all death ) , of which nearly half be due to motor vehicle emissions.2 If a third of these death could be avoid through increase public transport use ( and thus reduced car use ) , improve fuel and pollution-control technology for car , the “ live save ” would be greater than death due to HIV/AIDS , malignant melanoma , or workplace injuries.2 The effect of air pollution on health have become a major concern in recent year . In Australia , the increase interest in this issue have be spur not so much by a worsening of air quality as by accumulate evidence of its effect on health and the perceived need to “ do something about it ” . Epidemiological research into air pollution over the past 20 year have demonstrate cardiorespiratory health effect range from minor respiratory symptom to increased hospital admission and mortality.3 Toxicological and clinical study have elucidate the mechanism for some effect , but the association between relatively low urban air pollution level and increase cardiorespiratory mortality have not yet be explain . There be also increase global awareness of the extreme level of indoor and outdoor air pollution arise from the use of coal and biomass ( eg , wood , farm waste , cowdung ) for cooking and heating in develop countries.4 Coalburning to fuel industry and produce electricity be another major source of air pollution in some country — for example , India and China , where cheap coal be an important factor in industrialisation . On top of this , most develop country have a rapidly worsen problem of motor vehicle traffic congestion and associate air pollution ( Box 1 ) . The combination of these factor mean that in most large urban area exposure to air pollution be severe . Major air pollutants The source , health effect and vulnerable group for major air pollutant be summarise in Box 2 . In typical urban air pollution situation , particulate matter ( PM ) and gaseous pollutant ( oxide of nitrogen [ NOx ] , ozone , carbon monoxide [ CO ] and “ air toxics ” [ eg , hydrocarbon , aldehyde ] ) occur together , as the source be the same . Furthermore , level of pollutant vary dramatically by location and over time , depend on change meteorological factor such as wind speed and wind direction . This make it very difficult to isolate the health effect of individual pollutant . It be more useful to consider each of the major pollutant as “ indicator ” of the mixture of air pollution create by motor vehicle , home heating and industry . Continuous monitoring of PM , NOx , ozone and CO have be establish in recent year in the major Australian cities,6 but these data provide only general estimate of actual exposure in individual . CO be the only major air pollutant for which a biomarker of exposure ( carboxyhaemoglobin in erythrocyte ) be currently available . Researchers be currently investigate the importance of the size and chemical composition of particle as a causal factor for cardiorespiratory effects.3 Focus have now shift to the very small particle , PM2.5 and PM1 ( ie , particles smaller than 2.5 m or 1 m , respectively ) .3 As very small particle penetrate further into the lung than larger particle , they be believe to be more strongly associate with adverse health effect . Diesel engine emission contribute disproportionately to the verysmall-particle fraction of urban air pollution.7 The recent documentation of lung cancer as an effect of longterm exposure to urban air pollution8 put the spotlight on carcinogenic chemical in the smallest air particle and on carcinogenic gas ( eg , benzene ; benzo- ( alpha ) pyrene ) as possible causal agent . Carbon dioxide ( CO2 ) , another air pollutant create by fuel combustion , have no direct health effect at the concentration occur in the ambient environment . However , it be the main “ greenhouse gas ” cause global climate change9 and , as such , indirectly contribute to the global health impact of such change . Australia and New Zealand be among the few country where vehicle-related CO2 emission have substantially increase since 1996 , when the Kyoto Protocol on greenhouse gas reduction be sign . Efforts to reduce urban air pollution by reduce the use of car would have the added benefit of reduce CO2 emission . Adverse health effect There be an exhaustive literature on the health effect of the major air pollutant , include numerous epidemiological and toxicological study . In a recent review,10 the American Thoracic Society ( ATS ) expand its list of adverse health effect of air pollution to include not only clinical outcome ( such as hospital admission , loss of lung function , and mortality ) ( Box 2 ) , but also diminish quality of life and subclinical symptom that may interfere with daily activity ( Box 3 ) . In any particular study , establish whether there be an association between air pollution and one or more of the effect list in Box 2 and Box 3 depends on exposure level , the background health status of the population expose , and their age . Thus , some of the evidence may appear conflicting , and the ATS recommend that the effect in Box 3 should be include in future studies.10 We describe here the key epidemiological finding on the major effect of air pollution . Mortality Most recent epidemiological study of air pollution and mortality have use time-series analysis to relate daily mortality rate to daily air pollution level ( on the same day or previous day ) . However , this approach can not be use to ascertain whether increased mortality reflect a significant reduction in life expectancy.3 A few study have document association between mortality and air pollution exposure over longer period . The Harvard “ six city ” study11 involve a 14–16-year prospective cohort of more than 8000 adult in the United States , and the American Cancer Society ( ACS ) study collect data on over 500 000 people live in 51 different US metropolitan area from 1982 to 2000.8,12 These study report significant association between annual average particle pollution level ( PM10 or PM2.5 ) and annual allcause mortality rate : an average increase of 10 g/m3 of PM10 or PM2.5 be associate with a 3 % –4 % increase in mortality . The ACS study also find a significant association between level of PM2.5 and death due to cardiorespiratory disease and lung cancer.8 A “ natural intervention ” study with long-term exposure and effect data analyse mortality in Dublin before and after coal-burning be ban in 1990.13 The annual average particle pollution level decline by 36 % after the ban , while adjust mortality rate decrease by 15.5 % and 10.3 % for respiratory and cardiovascular death , respectively . No long-term exposure study have be carry out in Australia or New Zealand , but short-term time-series analy-ses suggest that the situation here be similar to that observe in many US and European study . Significant association between daily PM10 , NOx and/or CO level and daily cardiorespiratory mortality have be find in Sydney,14 Brisbane,15 and Christchurch,16 but the association have be weaker in Melbourne17 and Perth.18 A review of epidemiological study conclude that there may be a relationship between acute ozone exposure and increase mortality,19 especially in elderly people . However , the concurrence of high ozone level with hot weather make it difficult to separate the effect of heat from the effect of ozone on mortality . In Australia , ozone level have be find to affect daily mortality rate in Sydney , Brisbane and Melbourne,15,17 but the interpretation of these result raise similar concern to those of the recent review.19 Hospital admission Acute time-series studies3 have show association between particle pollution and daily hospital admission , mainly for respiratory disease ( especially asthma and chronic obstructive pulmonary disease ) but also for cardiovascular diseases.18,20-23 Other effect Studies in Australia have report an association between particle exposure from dust storm and exacerbation of asthma symptoms,24 and between particle exposure and decrease lung function in people with asthma.25 Some study have suggest that air pollutant be relate to respiratory allergic disease by the interaction between pollen allergen and air pollutant : air pollutant adhere to pollen grain may increase their impact , and probably also heighten airway responsiveness to aeroallergens.26 Role of the clinician Decisions about patient management would not normally be influence by the patient ’ s exposure to air pollution . ( The causal role of air pollution in disease be an epidemiological diagnosis . ) However , the following advice may be appropriate for patient who be particularly at risk ( eg , those with severe cardiac or respiratory disease ) : ■ Avoid specific exposure situation ( such as walk along a highly polluted road ) if these appear to exacerbate symptom ; ■ Avoid outdoor activity during smog episode , particularly exercise in the afternoon , when ozone level be highest27 ( as a result of delayed interaction between sunlight and morning peak-hour motor vehicle emission ) ; ■ ( For patient with asthma ) self-monitor peak expiratory flow more frequently during smog episode and adjust medication if necessary ; 27 ■ Avoid exposures to extreme heat or cold , as these can further exacerbate the health effect of air pollution ; ■ Stop smoking , as this further exacerbate the risk of cardiorespiratory disease . The shift panorama Current level of major air pollutant in Australian capital city and New Zealand only occasionally exceed air quality guideline . Particle pollution level have remain relatively stable during recent year , while NO2 level be only slowly decline ( Box 4 ) , as the increase number of vehicle and kilometre drive have be mitigate by increase use of catalytic converter ( for vehicle emission reduction ) and improved-quality diesel fuel . However , the epidemiological evidence show that air pollution , even at level below the commonly use air quality guidelines,3,8,11 increase mortality rates.2 To reduce the burden of disease relate to air pollution , Australian and New Zealand government could choose from a range of policy option that would make the air cleaner in the long term — for example , provide support and infrastructure for increase use of public transport , walk and bicycling ; popularise new vehicle with low-pollution engine ; and encourage improved efficiency of household heating and cooling device . From a global perspective , many develop country be at a similar stage of industrial and urban development to Western country 50–80 year ago , when high level of ambient air pollution from coal-burning be common . At the household level in develop country , promote energy-efficient and less-polluting cooking stove construct from local material would be an important step in reduce air pollution . Switching the energy source for cook to less-polluting kerosene , gas and electricity be another solution , often out of reach for poor community in the short term . Worldwide , a major change in priority be need to steer economic development towards low-pollution policy Associations between air pollution and multiple health effect be now well establish ( Pope 2007 ; Pope and Dockery 2006 ; Pope et al . 2002 ) . For key pollutant such as particulate matter ( PM ) and ozone ( Green et al . 1999 ) , there be no established threshold of exposure below which population health impact be absent . Given that everyone be expose to some level of air pollution , the attributable health burden can be high , particularly for vulnerable subpopulation . Recent evidence that air pollution lead to inflammatory process that mediate a variety of disease suggest an expand range of health impact relate to air pollution exposure . Consequently , the population health burden may be greater than previously believe . A discussion of the biological mechanism by which air pollution lead to cardiovascular and respiratory disease have be cover in detail elsewhere ( Brook et al . 2010 ; Ko and Hui 2009 ; Mittleman 2007 ; Nogueira 2009 ; Patel and Miller 2009 ) and be beyond the scope of this review . However , a mechanistic understanding provide information on the effect of timing and exposure duration on disease development and progression , how pollutant interact with other stressor , and potential mitigating factor such as nutritional supplementation or medication . Ambient PM affect respiratory and cardiovascular disease development and exacerbation via pulmonary ( neurologic ) reflex and pulmonary inflammation . Under some circumstance , these response result in systemic inflammation , oxidative stress , and alter vascular function . Collectively , these process can contribute to cardiovascular and pulmonary disease , include atherosclerosis . Evidence from natural experiment ( Clancy et al . 2002 ; Parker et al . 2008 ; Pope 2007 ) and from analysis of long-term trend ( Laden et al . 2006 ; Pope et al . 2009 ) indicate that reduce air pollution have clear health benefit . Traditionally , air quality management have focus on emissions-based pollution control . Although regulation promote cleaner vehicle engine technology , power production , and industrial combustion process have clearly lead to decrease emission , increase in vehicle-kilometers traveled and overall power generation and industrial activity may offset their effectiveness . Interventions separate people from pollution , which reduce exposure independent of emission control and mitigate health impact , have largely be overlook as component of formal strategy . For example , land-use decision typically do not consider air pollution–related health impact and do not require minimum distance between source and individual . A consequence of this have be the siting of residence , school , and hospital near major traffic artery . Modification of the infiltration of outdoor pollutant into indoor environment , which be largely a function of air exchange and building design , offer further opportunity for exposure reduction . Activity modification at an individual level such as alter the duration , intensity , and location where individual be physically active can also help reduce air pollution exposure and dose . Because the benefit of exercise on health be well establish , whereas the net consequence of physical activity in polluted environment remain unclear , recommendation on this topic must carefully weigh the benefit and risk of outdoor physical activity . To make further progress in reduce air pollution–related health impact , a new framework be need that incorporate strategy at regulatory , community , and individual level , to reduce both emission and exposure . Objectives An international workshop with participant from multiple discipline , title “ From Good Intentions to Proven Interventions : Effectiveness of Actions to Reduce the Health Impacts of Air Pollution , ” be convene 26–27 March 2009 in Vancouver , British Columbia , Canada . Participants include health and environmental researcher , public policy maker , air quality manager , health care provider , and nongovernmental organization representative . The primary focus of the workshop be to discuss evidence of the effectiveness of action , at the community and individual level , to reduce health impact of air pollution . Although national-level policy and management program as well as specific emission reduction program have receive considerable attention , this workshop focus on the state of the science around specific community- and individual-level intervention . Some example be behavior and its impact on exposure , medication and their influence on health outcome give air pollution exposure , and strategy to reduce individual baseline risk of condition associate with increased susceptibility to the effect of air pollution . The current understanding of biological mechanism such as systemic and local inflammatory impact and the role of air pollution relative to these disease process , be discuss , as be the role of exposure duration in disease initiation progression and reversal . Community-Level Interventions to Reduce Exposure Past and current outdoor air quality management activity have largely focus on emission reduction . From a public health perspective , activity such as technological improvement in combustion technology or fuel standard have the advantage of avoid the well-documented challenge of persuade individual to voluntarily change their behavior in order to protect themselves . Air pollution control have result in substantial decrease in level of air pollution , lead to measurable health benefit ( Clancy et al . 2002 ; Downs et al . 2007 ; Medley et al . 2002 ; Pope et al . 2009 ; Schindler et al . 2009 ) . Analysis of the effectiveness of regulation and air quality management action to reduce air pollution and its associated health impact be an active area of research that be discuss in more detail elsewhere ( van Erp et al . 2008 ) . Targeting specific source that contribute significantly to air pollution be an important strategy in improve air quality . During the workshop , several case study of community-level intervention be present include Dublin ’ s ( Ireland ) ban on sale of coal , Libby ’ s ( Montana ) woodstove exchange program , and London ’ s ( United Kingdom ) congestion charge zone ( CCZ ) and lowemission zone ( LEZ ) program . These be example of how source substitution , technology upgrade , and urban/transportation planning can lead to decrease in exposure and/or health impact . Although we briefly review these example below , it be important to consider that community-level effort will largely be location specific because they focus on major source of local pollution . Before the 1990 ban on the sale of coal , coal-related combustion be a major source of ambient air pollution in Dublin ( Clancy et al . 2002 ) . Within 6 year of the ban , ambient level of black smoke and sulfur dioxide decrease 70 % and 35 % , respectively . During the initial 72-month period after the ban , total mortality decrease by 6 % [ 95 % confidence interval ( CI ) , 4–7 % ] ( Clancy et al . 2002 ) . As expect , the largest effect be see for respiratory and cardiovascular death , with decrease of 16 % ( 95 % CI , 12–19 % ) and 10 % ( 95 % CI , 8–13 % ) , respectively . In many community , residential wood heating be an important contributor to wintertime pollution ( Naeher et al . 2007 ) . Because wood burning typically occur in residential area , the intake fraction ( the ratio of the total mass of a pollutant inhale to the mass of the pollutant emit ) of woodsmoke PM with an aerodynamic diameter of ≤ 2.5 µm ( PM2.5 ) be higher compare with PM2.5 from other source , such as traffic ( Ries et al . 2009 ) ; this suggest that reduce woodsmoke emission can effectively reduce PM2.5 exposure . To address this , woodstove exchange program that encourage resident to replace older stove with newer , cleaner burn model have be broadly implement . Follow-up of a large woodstove exchange campaign in Libby , where nearly 90 % of woodstoves be replace or remove , show reduction of 20 % , 64 % , and 50 % in average wintertime concentration of ( November–February ) PM2.5 , polycyclic aromatic hydrocarbon , and levoglucosan ( a woodsmoke tracer ) , respectively , compare with precampaign level ( Bergauff et al . 2008 ; Ward et al . 2009 ) . Preliminary analysis across the four winter season span the stove exchange find decreased reporting of childhood wheeze [ odds ratio ( OR ) = 0.75 per 5-μg/m3 reduction in ambient PM2.5 ; 95 % CI , 0.56–1.00 ] , upper respiratory infection , and bronchitis . Traffic-related air pollution be an important source of primary and secondary pollutant and a major contributor to intraurban variability in pollutant concentration . Accordingly , urban and transportation planning approach may be effective in reduce this variability , as well as the overall impact of this pollution source . To address traffic congestion in central London , a congestion charge scheme ( CCS ) be implement in 2003 . Although the objective of the CCS be to reduce the traffic congestion in the central city zone , air pollution reduction be a potential co-benefit ( Tonne et al . 2008 ) . The implementation of the CCS be estimate to lead to a modest decrease of 0.73 µg/m3 in the annual average nitrogen dioxide concentration in the CCZ ; however , this decrease be associate with an increase of 183 year of life gain per 100,000 population in the CCZ ( Tonne et al . 2008 ) . Although traffic congestion decrease initially , level do reach pre-CCS condition after 4 year , which may account for the limited improvement in air quality . Other positive health impact that may have result from the implementation of the CCS , but be not formally investigate , include an increase in active transport ( cycle and walking , albeit mitigate by exposure in a high-traffic zone ) , a decrease in noise pollution and related stress , and a decrease in vehicle traffic accident . More recently , London have also implement an LEZ specifically to target air pollution . The most polluting vehicle ( as define by the program ) , include heavy-duty diesel vehicle , larger van , and bus , must pay a daily charge to travel through the LEZ ( Kelly and Kelly 2009 ) . By 2012 , it be estimate that this program will lead to a 6.6 % reduction in PM10 ( PM with aerodynamic diameter ≤ 10 µm ) level ( Kelly and Kelly 2009 ) . LEZ program have also be implement elsewhere , include Tokyo , Japan , and Sweden , to reduce air and noise pollution . The example above illustrate how targeted intervention can affect source such as woodsmoke and vehicle traffic that operate in close proximity to population . Vehicle traffic have become a major source of air pollution in many community , and the benefit of strategy that address only emission reduction through improve vehicle technology and fuel quality may be at least partially offset by increase in vehicle-kilometers travel . Although the future introduction of zeroemission vehicle such as electric car may eliminate the need for alternative approach to reduce the impact of traffic-related air pollution , the broad proliferation of vehicle that do not emit pollutant be likely to be at least 20–30 year away ( America ’ s Energy Future Panel on Energy Efficiency Technologies 2009 ) . Until zero-emission vehicle be universal , land-use planning that favor sprawl and increase commuting distance , couple with poor public transit option , place greater dependence on vehicle travel . This be likely to result in increased emission of ozone precursor as well as increase pollutant exposure for those reside in area close to major traffic artery , sit in vehicle during heavy traffic , and attempt to walk , run , or bike along road . Even in a scenario of decrease pervehicle emission , a global economy that rely heavily on the transport of good over large distance ( Perez et al . 2009 ) and increase industrial and transportation activity close to community ( Hricko 2008 ) may also result in elevated exposure . A paradigm shift in how city be design and organize , with separation of densely populate area from major traffic artery couple with continued emission reduction ( e.g. , via low-emission public transit ) could significantly reduce individual exposure to traffic-related air pollutant . Such planning approach must also consider other relationship between build environment and health , such as the relationship between increase sprawl and ozone concentration ( Stone 2008 ) and between increase neighborhood walkability ( via higher density , street connectivity , and mixed-use design ) and elevated concentration of traffic-related pollutant ( Marshall et al . 2009 ) . Although individual be not typically expose to single pollutant , experimental and epidemiologic study design be limit in their ability to investigate the health effect of concurrent exposure to multiple pollutant . This be also a limitation of current air quality management . From a regulatory standpoint , guideline , standard , and emission limit be develop for single pollutant , under the notion that a give pollutant , although present in mixture , act individually to affect health and the environment ( Nadadur et al . 2007 ) and serve as a proxy for a more complex exposure . Although it be challenge to implement regulatory approach for pollutant mix , a deviation from the current singlepollutant approach ( Dominici et al . 2010 ) need to be consider . Synergy involve ozone and other pollutant such as black carbon , and nitrogen dioxide have be demonstrate in animal and human population ( Mauderly and Samet 2009 ) . In combination , these pollutant may cause a greater additive effect on lung function , cytokine production , and cardiac output and stroke volume compare with the individual pollutant themselves ( Mauderly and Samet 2009 ) . Assessing the effect of individual pollutant likely present only a partial description of the overall health impact of air pollution exposure . Given the potential for additive or synergistic effect , approach that reduce exposure to multiple pollutant may be more effective than effort to reduce emission of single compound . For example , with accumulate evidence of cardiopulmonary morbidity and mortality associate with traffic-related air pollution exposure ( Health Effects Institute 2010 ) , increase the distance between population and major road may result in substantial health benefit . Attenuated lung function , increase marker of oxidative stress , and airway inflammation have be show in asthmatic and nonasthmatics expose to road-traffic pollution ( Barraza-Villarreal et al . 2008 ; McCreanor et al . 2007 ; Romieu et al . 2008a ) . Additionally , child expose to higher level of traffic-related pollution ( > 0.41 µg/m3 elemental carbon attributable to traffic ) before 12 month of age have an increase risk of persistent wheeze ( OR = 1.75 ; 95 % CI , 1.07–2.87 ) ( Ryan et al . 2009 ) . Individuals reside within 50 m of a major road have a 63 % excess risk of develop high coronary artery calcification compare with those live > 200 m away from a major road ( Hoffmann et al . 2007 ) , suggest that the separation of residential area from major road may be an important public health intervention . Although separate individual from pollution source be likely to have health benefit , not all pollutant ( i.e. , ozone ) decrease with increase distance from roadway ( Beckerman et al . 2008 ) . More specific evidence of the benefit relate to intervention can be find in recent research indicate that adult who move away from residence in close proximity to traffic ( < 150 m from a highway or < 50 m from a major road ) have a lower risk of coronary heart disease ( CHD ) mortality than do those remain in location close to traffic ; in both case , the risk of CHD mortality be greater than in those who never live in close proximity to traffic ( Gan et al . 2010 ) . Additionally , child who move away from residence with high background PM10 experience an increased rate of lung function growth compare with child who move to area with high PM10 ( Avol et al . 2001 ) . Finally , introduce an electronic toll collection along the New Jersey Turnpike to reduce congestion be associate temporally and spatially with reduction in incidence of prematurity and low birth weight among mother live near toll plaza ( Currie 2009 ) . These finding suggest that community design that aim to separate such facility as school , child care center , and hospital from major traffic artery or approach to mitigate traffic congestion can reduce exposure and impact among vulnerable member of the population ( California Air Resources Board 2005 ; Ministry of Environment 2006a , 2006b ) . In addition to simple separation of population from traffic artery , the establishment of “ mixed-use ” ( i.e. , residential , commercial , recreational ) and high-density area would allow for more “ walkable ” city , potentially lead to reduce emission through decrease automobile use . “ Walkability , ” a measure of how conducive an environment be to walk , can help to predict level of physical activity and active transportation within the community ( Frank and Engelke 2005 ) . Community design facilitate improved fitness may reduce the health impact of air pollution by decrease the proportion of the population with underlying cardiopulmonary disease risk factor , and therefore reduce their susceptibility to air pollution . Therefore , the development of more walkable community have the potential to provide population-level health benefit through both lower emission and a decrease in underlie cardiovascular risk . Interventions Directed to Individuals In addition to the air quality management strategy focus on emission reduction and local initiative to control source and separate them from residential location , school , and health care facility , the workshop highlight the value of lower baseline health risk to reduce pollution-related health impact . Specifically , the implementation of establish primary , secondary , and tertiary intervention ( e.g. , control hypertension , lower lipid , reduce obesity , promote physical activity and smoking cessation ) for disease affect by air pollution exposure will serve to reduce the overall burden of disease associate with air pollution exposure . For example , sedentary individual and those with a diet deficient in antioxidant or with a high salt diet may have an increase risk of develop cardiovascular disease ( Marchioli 2003 ; Qin et al . 2009 ; Warburton et al . 2006 ) and may therefore also be more susceptible to the effect of air pollution . Through diet modification , exercise , and possibly via antioxidant supplementation , individual can potentially reduce their personal susceptibility . Several of these approach be discuss in more detail below . ﻿Air pollution , release into the atmosphere of various gas , finely divided solid , or finely dispersed liquid aerosol at rate that exceed the natural capacity of the environment to dissipate and dilute or absorb them . These substance may reach concentration in the air that cause undesirable health , economic , or aesthetic effect . Major Air Pollutants Criteria pollutant Clean , dry air consist primarily of nitrogen and oxygen—78 percent and 21 percent respectively , by volume . The remain 1 percent be a mixture of other gas , mostly argon ( 0.9 percent ) , along with trace ( very small ) amount of carbon dioxide , methane , hydrogen , helium , and more . Water vapour be also a normal , though quite variable , component of the atmosphere , normally range from 0.01 to 4 percent by volume ; under very humid condition the moisture content of air may be as high as 5 percent . There be six major air pollutant that have be designate by the U.S. Environmental Protection Agency ( EPA ) as “ criterion ” pollutants—criteria mean that the concentration of these pollutant in the atmosphere be useful as indicator of overall air quality . The source , acceptable concentration , and effect of the criterion pollutant be summarize in the table . Criteria air pollutant pollutant common source maximum acceptable concentration in the atmosphere environmental risk human health risk Source : U.S. Environmental Protection Agency carbon monoxide ( CO ) automobile emission , fire , industrial process 35 ppm ( 1-hour period ) ; 9 ppm ( 8-hour period ) contribute to smog formation exacerbate symptom of heart disease , such as chest pain ; may cause vision problem and reduce physical and mental capability in healthy people nitrogen oxide ( NO and NO2 ) automobile emission , electricity generation , industrial process 0.053 ppm ( 1-year period ) damage to foliage ; contribute to smog formation inflammation and irritation of breathe passage sulfur dioxide ( SO2 ) electricity generation , fossil-fuel combustion , industrial process , automobile emission 0.03 ppm ( 1-year period ) ; 0.14 ppm ( 24-hour period ) major cause of haze ; contribute to acid rain formation , which subsequently damage foliage , building , and monument ; reacts to form particulate matter breathe difficulty , particularly for people with asthma and heart disease ozone ( O3 ) nitrogen oxide ( NOx ) and volatile organic compound ( VOCs ) from industrial and automobile emission , gasoline vapour , chemical solvent , and electrical utility 0.075 ppm ( 8-hour period ) interfere with the ability of certain plant to respire , lead to increase susceptibility to other environmental stressor ( e.g. , disease , harsh weather ) reduce lung function ; irritation and inflammation of breathe passage particulate matter source of primary particle include fire , smokestack , construction site , and unpaved road ; source of secondary particle include reaction between gaseous chemical emit by power plant and automobile 150 μg/m3 ( 24-hour period for particle < 10 μm ) ; 35 μg/m3 ( 24-hour period for particle < 2.5 μm ) contribute to formation of haze as well as acid rain , which change the pH balance of waterway and damage foliage , building , and monument irritation of breathe passage , aggravation of asthma , irregular heartbeat lead ( Pb ) metal processing , waste incineration , fossil-fuel combustion 0.15 μg/m3 ( roll three-month average ) ; 1.5 μg/m3 ( quarterly average ) loss of biodiversity , decrease reproduction , neurological problem in vertebrate adverse effect upon multiple bodily system ; may contribute to learn disability when young child be expose ; cardiovascular effect in adult The gaseous criterion air pollutant of primary concern in urban setting include sulfur dioxide , nitrogen dioxide , and carbon monoxide ; these be emit directly into the air from fossil fuel such as fuel oil , gasoline , and natural gas that be burn in power plant , automobile , and other combustion source . Ozone ( a key component of smog ) be also a gaseous pollutant ; it form in the atmosphere via complex chemical reaction occur between nitrogen dioxide and various volatile organic compound ( e.g. , gasoline vapour ) . Airborne suspension of extremely small solid or liquid particle call “ particulate ” ( e.g. , soot , dust , smoke , fume , mist ) , especially those less than 10 micrometres ( μm ; millionth of a metre ) in size , be significant air pollutant because of their very harmful effect on human health . They be emit by various industrial process , coal- or oil-burning power plant , residential heating system , and automobile . Lead fume ( airborne particulates less than 0.5 μm in size ) be particularly toxic and be an important pollutant of many diesel fuel . Except for lead , criteria pollutant be emit in industrialized country at very high rate , typically measure in million of ton per year . All except ozone be discharge directly into the atmosphere from a wide variety of source . They be regulate primarily by establish ambient air quality standard , which be maximum acceptable concentration of each criterion pollutant in the atmosphere , regardless of its origin . The six criterion pollutant be describe in turn below . Fine particulates Very small fragment of solid material or liquid droplet suspend in air be call particulate . Except for airborne lead , which be treat as a separate category , they be characterize on the basis of size and phase ( i.e. , solid or liquid ) rather than by chemical composition . For example , solid particulate between roughly 1 and 100 μm in diameter be call dust particle , whereas airborne solid less than 1 μm in diameter be call fume . The particulate of most concern with regard to their effect on human health be solid less than 10 μm in diameter , because they can be inhale deep into the lung and become trap in the lower respiratory system . Certain particulate , such as asbestos fibre , be know carcinogen ( cancer-causing agent ) , and many carbonaceous particulates—e.g. , soot—are suspect of be carcinogenic . Major source of particulate emission include fossil-fuel power plant , manufacturing process , fossil-fuel residential heating system , and gasoline-powered vehicle . Carbon monoxide Carbon monoxide be an odourless , invisible gas form as a result of incomplete combustion . It be the most abundant of the criterion pollutant . Gasoline-powered highway vehicle be the primary source , although residential heat system and certain industrial process also emit significant amount of this gas . Power plant emit relatively little carbon monoxide because they be carefully design and operate to maximize combustion efficiency . Exposure to carbon monoxide can be acutely harmful since it readily displace oxygen in the bloodstream , lead to asphyxiation at high enough concentration and exposure time . Sulfur dioxide A colourless gas with a sharp , choke odour , sulfur dioxide be form during the combustion of coal or oil that contain sulfur as an impurity . Most sulfur dioxide emission come from power-generating plant ; very little come from mobile source . This pungent gas can cause eye and throat irritation and harm lung tissue when inhale . Sulfur dioxide also react with oxygen and water vapour in the air , form a mist of sulfuric acid that reach the ground as a component of acid rain . Acid rain be believe to have harm or destroy fish and plant life in many thousand of lake and stream in part of Europe , the northeastern United States , southeastern Canada , and part of China . It also cause corrosion of metal and deterioration of the exposed surface of building and public monument . Nitrogen dioxide Of the several form of nitrogen oxide , nitrogen dioxide—a pungent , irritate gas—is of most concern . It be know to cause pulmonary edema , an accumulation of excessive fluid in the lung . Nitrogen dioxide also react in the atmosphere to form nitric acid , contribute to the problem of acid rain . In addition , nitrogen dioxide play a role in the formation of photochemical smog , a reddish brown haze that often be see in many urban area and that be create by sunlight-promoted reaction in the lower atmosphere . Nitrogen oxide be form when combustion temperature be high enough to cause molecular nitrogen in the air to react with oxygen . Stationary source such as coal-burning power plant be major contributor of this pollutant , although gasoline engine and other mobile source be also significant . Ozone A key component of photochemical smog , ozone be form by a complex reaction between nitrogen dioxide and hydrocarbon in the presence of sunlight . It be consider to be a criteria pollutant in the troposphere—the lowermost layer of the atmosphere—but not in the upper atmosphere , where it occur naturally and serve to block harmful ultraviolet ray from the Sun . Because nitrogen dioxide and hydrocarbon be emit in significant quantity by motor vehicle , photochemical smog be common in city such as Los Angeles , where sunshine be ample and highway traffic be heavy . Certain geographic feature , such as mountain that impede air movement , and weather condition , such as temperature inversion in the troposphere , contribute to the trapping of air pollutant and the formation of photochemical smog . Lead Inhaled lead particulate in the form of fume and dust be particularly harmful to child , in whom even slightly elevated level of lead in the blood can cause learn disability , seizure , or even death ( see lead poison ) . Sources of airborne lead particulate include oil refining , smelting , and other industrial activity . In the past , combustion of gasoline contain a lead-based antiknock additive call tetraethyl lead be a major source of lead particulate . In many country there be now a complete ban on the use of lead in gasoline . In the United States , lead concentration in outdoor air decrease more than 90 percent after the use of leaded gasoline be restrict in the mid-1970s and then completely ban in 1996 . Air toxics Hundreds of specific substance be consider hazardous when present in trace amount in the air . These pollutant be call air toxics . Many of them cause genetic mutation or cancer ; some cause other type of health problem , such as adverse effect on brain tissue or fetal development . Although the total emission and the number of source of air toxics be small compare with those for criterion pollutant , these pollutant can pose an immediate health risk to expose individual and can cause other environmental problem . Most air toxics be organic chemical , comprise molecule that contain carbon , hydrogen , and other atom . Many be volatile organic compound ( VOCs ) , organic compound that readily evaporate . VOCs include pure hydrocarbon , partially oxidized hydrocarbon , and organic compound contain chlorine , sulfur , or nitrogen . They be widely use as fuel ( e.g. , propane and gasoline ) , as paint thinner and solvent , and in the production of plastic . In addition to contribute to air toxicity and urban smog , some VOC emission act as greenhouse gas and , in so do , contribute to global warming . Some other air toxics be metal or compound of metals—for example , mercury , arsenic , and cadmium . In many country , standard have be set to control industrial emission of several air toxics . The first hazardous air pollutant regulate in the United States ( outside the workplace environment ) be arsenic , asbestos , benzene , beryllium , coke oven emission , mercury , radionuclides ( radioactive isotope ) , and vinyl chloride . In 1990 this short list be expand to include 189 substance as part of the significant amendment to the Clean Air Act of 1970 . By the end of the 1990s , specific emission control standard be require in the United States for “ major source ” —those that release more than 10 ton per year of any of these material or more than 25 ton per year of any combination of them . Important air toxics , their source , and their environmental effect be summarize in the table . Important hazardous air pollutant ( air toxics ) air toxic common source human health risk Source : U.S. Environmental Protection Agency arsenic volcano , weather of rock and mineral contain arsenic , industrial process such as metal smelting , burn wood that have be treat with arsenic compound acute effect include gastrointestinal disorder , headache , hypotension , shock , and death ; chronic effect include dermatitis , irritation of mucous membrane , gastrointestinal disorder , and lung cancer asbestos natural deposit , building material chronic effect include asbestosis ( lung disease ) , pulmonary hypertension , lung cancer , and mesothelioma benzene burn coal and oil , vehicle exhaust , industrial solvent , tobacco smoke acute effect include dizziness , drowsiness , unconsciousness , and irritation of skin and mucous membrane ; chronic effect include blood disorder include aplastic anemia , adverse effect on fetal development , and leukemia beryllium compound burn coal and oil , tobacco smoke , natural occurrence in soil acute effect include inflammation and swelling of the lung ; chronic effect include chronic beryllium disease ( development of noncancerous lesion in the lung ) cadmium compound burn fossil fuel , incineration of waste , smelt of zinc , lead , and copper acute effect include lung irritation ; chronic effect include various kidney disorder , sperm-count reduction , and lung cancer chlorine papermaking , drink water , swimming pool acute and chronic effect include irritation of mucous membrane and respiratory tract coke oven emission coke oven chronic effect include conjunctivitis , dermatitis , lesion of respiratory and digestive system , and various cancer cyanide compound automobile exhaust , chemical processing , waste incineration acute effect include headache , nausea , eye and skin irritation , and death ; chronic effect include central nervous system disorder and thyroid disorder formaldehyde building material and home furnishing , power plant , incineration of waste , automobile exhaust , tobacco smoke acute effect include irritation of eye and respiratory tract and inflammation of mouth , esophagus , and stomach if ingest ; chronic effect include lesion in respiratory tract , menstrual disorder , and lung and nasopharyngeal cancer lead compound battery manufacturing , paint and ceramic glaze , metal product acute effect include gastrointestinal disorder and death ; chronic effect include anemia , neurological disorder , reduce sperm count , and fetal effect include low birth weight and mental impairment mercury compound paint manufacture prior to 1990–91 , battery , industrial process , dental amalgam filling , fish product acute effect include central nervous system effect include irritability , slow sensory and motor nerve function , blindness , and deafness ( depend on compound ) ; chronic effect include a variety of central nervous system effect include erethism , insomnia , deafness , and blur vision and kidney damage nickel compound nickel processing , fossil-fuel burning , sewage sludge incineration acute effect include lung and kidney damage ( anecdotal report ) and gastrointestinal disorder ; chronic effect include dermatitis and asthma radionucleides ( radon , radium , uranium ) ambient air ( radon , uranium ) , drink water ( uranium ) , uranium mine and processing facility , phosphate fertilizer chronic effect include lung , bone , and nasal cancer selenium compound drinking water and ambient air , some plastic and paint , pharmaceutical production acute effect include irritation of the respiratory and gastrointestinal tract ; chronic effect include loss of hair and tooth decay and discoloration vinyl chloride manufacture of polyvinyl chloride ( PVC ) , which be use in pipe , furniture , and automobile acute effect imclude central nervous system issue include dizziness , drowsiness , headache , loss of consciousness , and inhibition of blood clotting ; chronic effect include , rarely , vinyl chloride disease , in which change occur in the bone and skin of the finger and sensitivity to cold be increase , and liver cancer Air toxics may be release in sudden and catastrophic accident rather than steadily and gradually from many source . For example , in the Bhopal disaster of 1984 , an accidental release of methyl isocyanate at a Union Carbide pesticide factory in Bhopal , Madhya Pradesh state , India , immediately kill at least 3,000 people , eventually cause the death of an estimate 15,000 to 25,000 people over the following quarter-century , and injured hundred of thousand more . The risk of accidental release of very hazardous substance into the air be generally higher for people live in industrialized urban area . Hundreds of such incident occur each year , though none have be as severe as the Bhopal event . Other than in case of occupational exposure or accidental release , health threat from air toxics be greatest for people who live near large industrial facility or in congested and polluted urban area . Most major source of air toxics be so-called point sources—that be , they have a specific location . Point source include chemical plant , steel mill , oil refinery , and municipal waste incinerator . Hazardous air pollutant may be release when equipment leak or when material be transfer , or they may be emit from smokestack . Municipal waste incinerator , for example , can emit hazardous level of dioxin , formaldehyde , and other organic substance , as well as metal such as arsenic , beryllium , lead , and mercury . Nevertheless , proper combustion along with appropriate air pollution control device can reduce emission of these substance to acceptable level . Hazardous air pollutant also come from “ area ” source , which be many smaller source that release pollutant into the outdoor air in a defined area . Such source include commercial dry-cleaning facility , gasoline station , small metal-plating operation , and woodstoves . Emission of air toxics from area source be also regulate under some circumstance . Small area source account for about 25 percent of all emission of air toxics . Major point source account for another 20 percent . The rest—more than half of hazardous air-pollutant emissions—come from motor vehicle . For example , benzene , a component of gasoline , be release as unburned fuel or as fuel vapour , and formaldehyde be one of the by-product of incomplete combustion . Newer car , however , have emission control device that significantly reduce the release of air toxics . Greenhouse gas Global warming be recognize by almost all atmospheric scientist as a significant environmental problem cause by an increase in level of certain trace gas in the atmosphere since the beginning of the Industrial Revolution in the mid-18th century . These gas , collectively call greenhouse gas , include carbon dioxide , organic chemical call chlorofluorocarbon ( CFCs ) , methane , nitrous oxide , ozone , and many others . Carbon dioxide , although not the most potent of the greenhouse gas , be the most important because of the huge volume emit into the air by combustion of fossil fuel ( e.g. , gasoline , oil , coal ) . Carbon dioxide be consider a normal component of the atmosphere , and before the Industrial Revolution the average level of this gas be about 280 part per million ( ppm ) . By 2020 the level of carbon dioxide have reach 417 ppm , and they continue to increase at a rate of almost 3 ppm per year . Many scientist think that carbon dioxide should be regulate as a pollutant—a position take by the EPA in 2009 in a ruling that such regulation could be promulgate . International cooperation and agreement , such as the Paris Agreement of 2015 , would be necessary to reduce carbon dioxide emission worldwide . Air Pollution And Air Movement Local air quality typically vary over time because of the effect of weather pattern . For example , air pollutant be dilute and disperse in a horizontal direction by prevail wind , and they be disperse in a vertical direction by atmospheric instability . Unstable atmospheric condition occur when air mass move naturally in a vertical direction , thereby mix and disperse pollutant . When there be little or no vertical movement of air ( stable condition ) , pollutant can accumulate near the ground and cause temporary but acute episode of air pollution . With regard to air quality , unstable atmospheric condition be preferable to stable condition . The degree of atmospheric instability depend on the temperature gradient ( i.e. , the rate at which air temperature change with altitude ) . In the troposphere ( the lowest layer of the atmosphere , where most weather occurs ) , air temperature normally decrease as altitude increase ; the faster the rate of decrease , the more unstable the atmosphere . Under certain condition , however , a temporary “ temperature inversion ” may occur , during which time the air temperature increase with increase altitude , and the atmosphere be very stable . Temperature inversion prevent the upward mixing and dispersion of pollutant and be the major cause of air pollution episode . Certain geographic condition exacerbate the effect of inversion . For example , Los Angeles , situate on a plain on the Pacific coast of California and surround by mountain that block horizontal air motion , be particularly susceptible to the stagnation effect of inversions—hence the infamous Los Angeles smog . On the opposite coast of North America , another metropolis , New York City , produce greater quantity of pollutant than do Los Angeles but have be spar major air pollution disasters—only because of favourable climatic and geographic circumstance . During the mid-20th century , governmental effort to reduce air pollution increase substantially after several major inversion , such as the Great Smog of London , a weeklong air pollution episode in London in 1952 that be directly blame for more than 4,000 death . The Global Reach Of Air Pollution Because some air pollutant persist in the atmosphere and be carry long distance by wind , air pollution transcend local , regional , and continental boundary , and it also may have an effect on global climate and weather . For example , acid rain have gain worldwide attention since the 1970s as a regional and even continental problem . Acid rain occur when sulfur dioxide and nitrogen oxide from the burning of fossil fuel combine with water vapour in the atmosphere , form sulfuric acid and nitric acid mist . The result acidic precipitation be damage to water , forest , and soil resource . It have cause the disappearance of fish from many lake in the Adirondack Mountains of North America , the widespread death of forest in mountain of Europe , and damage to tree growth in the United States and Canada . Acid rain can also corrode building material and be hazardous to human health . These problem be not contain by political boundary . Emissions from the burning of fossil fuel in the middle section of the United States and Canada be precipitate as acid rain in the eastern region of those country , and acid rain in Norway come largely from industrial area in Great Britain and continental Europe . The international scope of the problem have lead to the signing of international agreement on the limitation of sulfur and nitrogen oxide emission . Another global problem cause by air pollution be the ozone depletion in the stratosphere . At ground level ( i.e. , in the troposphere ) , ozone be a pollutant , but at altitude above 12 km ( 7 mile ) it play a crucial role in absorb and thereby block ultraviolet radiation ( UV ) from the Sun before it reach the ground . Exposure to UV radiation have be link to skin cancer and other health problem . In 1985 it be discover that a large “ ozone hole , ” an ozone-depleted region , be present every year between August and November over the continent of Antarctica . The size of this hole be increase by the presence in the atmosphere of chlorofluorocarbon ( CFCs ) ; these emanate from aerosol spray can , refrigerator , industrial solvent , and other source and be transport to Antarctica by atmospheric circulation . It have already be demonstrate in the mid-1970s that CFCs pose a threat to the global ozonosphere , and in 1978 the use of CFCs as propellant in aerosol can be ban in the United States . Their use be subsequently restrict in several other country . In 1987 representative from more than 45 country sign the Montreal Protocol , agree to place severe limitation on the production of CFCs . The efficacy of this legislation and global effort can be see in the ozone layer ’ s continue recovery ; in 2019 scientist record the smallest ozone hole above Antarctica since 1982 . One of the most significant effect of air pollution be on climate change , particularly global warming . As a result of the grow worldwide consumption of fossil fuel , carbon dioxide level in the atmosphere have increase steadily since 1900 , and the rate of increase be accelerate . It have be estimate that if carbon dioxide level be not reduce , average global air temperature may rise another 4 °C ( 7.2 °F ) by the end of the 21st century . Such a warm trend might cause melting of the polar ice cap , rise of the sea level , and flooding of the coastal area of the world . Changes in precipitation pattern cause by global warming might have adverse effect on agriculture and forest ecosystem , and higher temperature and humidity might increase the incidence of disease in human and animal in some part of the world . Implementation of international agreement on reduce greenhouse gas be require to protect global air quality and to mitigate the effect of global warming . Indoor Air Pollution Health risk relate to indoor air pollution have become an issue of concern because people generally spend most of their time indoors at home and at work . The problem have be exacerbate by well-meaning effort to lower air-exchange rate in building in order to conserve energy ; these effort unfortunately allow contaminant to accumulate indoors . Indoor air pollutant include various combustion product from stove , kerosene space heater , and fireplace , as well as volatile organic compound ( VOCs ) from household product ( e.g. , paint , clean agent , and pesticide ) . Formaldehyde off-gassing from building product ( especially particleboard and plywood ) and from dry-cleaned textile can accumulate in indoor air . Bacteria , virus , mold , animal dander , dust mite , and pollen be biological contaminant that can cause disease and other health problem , especially if they build up in and be spread by central heating or cool system . Environmental tobacco smoke , also call secondhand smoke , be an indoor air pollutant in many home , despite widespread knowledge about the harmful effect of smoking . Secondhand smoke contains many carcinogenic compound as well as strong irritant . In some geographic region , naturally occur radon , a radioactive gas , can seep from the ground into building and accumulate to harmful level . Exposure to all indoor air pollutant can be reduce by appropriate building construction and maintenance method , limitation on pollutant source , and provision of adequate ventilation . Indoor Air Pollution and Health Indoor Air Quality ( IAQ ) refers to the air quality within and around building and structure , especially as it relate to the health and comfort of building occupant . Understanding and control common pollutant indoors can help reduce your risk of indoor health concern . Health effect from indoor air pollutant may be experience soon after exposure or , possibly , year later . Immediate Effects Some health effect may show up shortly after a single exposure or repeat exposure to a pollutant . These include irritation of the eye , nose , and throat , headache , dizziness , and fatigue . Such immediate effect be usually short-term and treatable . Sometimes the treatment be simply eliminate the person 's exposure to the source of the pollution , if it can be identify . Soon after exposure to some indoor air pollutant , symptom of some disease such as asthma may show up , be aggravate or worsen . The likelihood of immediate reaction to indoor air pollutant depend on several factor include age and preexist medical condition . In some case , whether a person react to a pollutant depend on individual sensitivity , which vary tremendously from person to person . Some people can become sensitized to biological or chemical pollutant after repeat or high level exposure . Certain immediate effect be similar to those from cold or other viral disease , so it be often difficult to determine if the symptom be a result of exposure to indoor air pollution . For this reason , it be important to pay attention to the time and place symptom occur . If the symptom fade or go away when a person be away from the area , for example , an effort should be make to identify indoor air source that may be possible cause . Some effect may be make worse by an inadequate supply of outdoor air come indoors or from the heating , cool or humidity condition prevalent indoors . Long-Term Effects Other health effect may show up either year after exposure have occur or only after long or repeat period of exposure . These effect , which include some respiratory disease , heart disease and cancer , can be severely debilitate or fatal . It be prudent to try to improve the indoor air quality in your home even if symptom be not noticeable . While pollutant commonly find in indoor air can cause many harmful effect , there be considerable uncertainty about what concentration or period of exposure be necessary to produce specific health problem . People also react very differently to exposure to indoor air pollutant . Further research be need to better understand which health effect occur after exposure to the average pollutant concentration find in home and which occur from the higher concentration that occur for short period of time . Primary Causes of Indoor Air Problems Indoor pollution source that release gas or particle into the air be the primary cause of indoor air quality problem . Inadequate ventilation can increase indoor pollutant level by not bring in enough outdoor air to dilute emission from indoor source and by not carry indoor air pollutant out of the area . High temperature and humidity level can also increase concentration of some pollutant . Pollutant Sources There be many source of indoor air pollution . These can include : • Fuel-buring combustion appliance • Tobacco product • Building material and furnishing as diverse as : o Deteriorated asbestos-containing insulation o Newly instal flooring , upholstery or carpet o Cabinetry or furniture make of certain press wood product • Products for household cleaning and maintenance , personal care , or hobby • Central heating and cool system and humidification device • Excess moisture • Outdoor source such as : o Radon o Pesticides o Outdoor air pollution . The relative importance of any single source depend on how much of a give pollutant it emit and how hazardous those emission be . In some case , factor such as how old the source be and whether it be properly maintain be significant . For example , an improperly adjust gas stove can emit significantly more carbon monoxide than one that be properly adjust . Some source , such as building material , furnishing and product like air freshener , can release pollutant more or less continuously . Other source , relate to activity like smoking , cleaning , redecorate or do hobblies release pollutant intermittently . Unvented or malfunction appliance or improperly use product can release higher and sometimes dangerous level of pollutant indoors . Pollutant concentration can remain in the air for long period after some activity . Inadequate Ventilation If too little outdoor air enters indoors , pollutant can accumulate to level that can pose health and comfort problem . Unless building be build with special mechanical mean of ventilation , those design and construct to minimize the amount of outdoor air that can `` leak '' in and out may have higher indoor pollutant level . How Outdoor Air Enters a Building Outdoor air can enter and leave a building by : infiltration , natural ventilation , and mechanical ventilation . In a process know as infiltration , outdoor air flow into building through opening , joint , and crack in wall , floor , and ceiling , and around window and door . In natural ventilation , air move through open window and door . Air movement associate with infiltration and natural ventilation be cause by air temperature difference between indoors and outdoors and by wind . Finally , there be a number of mechanical ventilation device , from outdoor-vented fan that intermittently remove air from a single room , such as bathroom and kitchen , to air handle system that use fan and duct work to continuously remove indoor air and distribute filter and condition outdoor air to strategic point throughout the house . The rate at which outdoor air replaces indoor air be describe as the air exchange rate . When there be little infiltration , natural ventilation , or mechanical ventilation , the air exchange rate be low and pollutant level can increase . Indoor Air Quality and Environmental Justice EPA define environmental justice ( EJ ) as `` the fair treatment and meaningful involvement of all people regardless of race , color , national origin , or income with respect to the development , implementation , and enforcement of environmental law , regulation , and policy . '' To effectively address EJ concern , the Agency recognize that community must be the impetus for implement local solution for environmental health problem include indoor air . However , far too many community lack the capacity to truly effect their environmental condition . This include some condition find indoors , as well as condition cause by outdoor impact ( such as climate change ) . Many report and study indicate that the following population may be disproportionately impact by indoor asthma trigger , secondhand smoke , mold , radon and other indoor pollutant : • child • elderly • low-income • minority • Tribes and indigenous people . EPA 's Indoor Environments Division ( IED ) provide guidance and program to help build the capacity of community to understand and avoid indoor and outdoor health impact . IED 's main objective be to improve indoor air quality in building where people live , learn and work . Indoor air pollution be one of the world ’ s largest environmental problem – particularly for the poorest in the world who often do not have access to clean fuel for cook . The Global Burden of Disease be a major global study on the cause and risk factor for death and disease publish in the medical journal The Lancet.2 These estimate of the annual number of death attribute to a wide range of risk factor be show here . This chart be show for the global total , but can be explore for any country or region use the “ change country ” toggle . Indoor air pollution be a risk factor for several of the world ’ s lead cause of death , include heart disease , pneumonia , stroke , diabetes and lung cancer.3 In the chart we see that it be one of the lead risk factor for death globally . According to the Global Burden of Disease study 1.6 million people die prematurely in 2017 as a result of indoor air pollution . To put this into context : this be four time the number of homicide – close to 400,000 in 2017 . Because the IHME data be more recent we rely mostly on IHME data in our work on indoor air pollution . But it ’ s worth note that the WHO publish a substantially larger number of indoor air pollution death . For 2012 ( the latest available data ) the WHO estimate 4.3 million deaths.4 IHME in contrast estimate 1.8 million death due to indoor air pollution for 2012 . We be unfortunately not aware of any detailed explanation for the large discrepancy between these two estimate . It ’ s one of the lead risk factor for death globally ; but for low-income country , it ’ s the lead risk factor . If we look at the breakdown for country with a low sociodemographic index – ‘ Low SDI ’ on the interactive chart – we see that indoor air pollution top the list . For low-income country , the number of premature death from air pollution be more than ten time the number from homicide in 2017.5 The Institute for Health Metrics and Evaluation ( IHME ) estimate that 1.6 million people die prematurely as a result of indoor air pollution in 2017 . This be 3 % of global death . In low-income country , it account for 6 % of death . In the map here we see the share of annual death attribute to indoor air pollution across the world . In 2017 this range from a high of close to 11 % in Papua New Guinea – more than 1-in-10 death – to less than 0.1 % across most of Europe and North America . When we compare the share of death attribute to indoor air pollution either over time or between country , we be not only compare the extent of indoor air pollution , but its severity in the context of other risk factor for death . Indoor air pollution ’ s share do not only depend on how many die prematurely from it , but what else people be die from and how this be change . When we look at the share die from indoor air pollution , figure be high across the lowest-income country in Sub-Saharan Africa , but not markedly different from country across Asia or Latin America . There , the severity of indoor air pollution – express as the share of death – have be mask by the role of other risk factor at low-incomes , such as low access to safe water , poor sanitation and unsafe sex which be a risk factor for HIV/AIDS . Death rate be highest across low income country Death rate from indoor air pollution give us an accurate comparison of difference in its mortality impact between country and over time . In contrast to the share of death that we study before , death rate be not influence by how other cause or risk factor for death be change . In this map we see death rate from indoor air pollution across the world . Death rate measure the number of death per 100,000 people in a give country or region . What become clear be the large difference in death rate between country : rate be high in lower-income country , particularly across Sub-Saharan Africa and Asia . Rates here be often greater than 100 death per 100,000 – in Papua New Guinea this be over 200 per 100,000 . Compare this with death rate across high-income country : across North America rate be below 0.1 death per 100,000 . That ’ s a greater than 1000-fold difference . The issue of indoor air pollution therefore have a clear economic split : it be a problem that have almost be entirely eliminate across high-income country , but remain a large environmental and health problem at lower income . We see this relationship clearly when we plot death rate versus income , as show here . There be a strong negative relationship : death rate decline as country get richer . This be also true when make this comparison between extreme poverty rate and pollution effect . How have mortality from indoor air pollution change over time ? Annual death from indoor air pollution have decline globally by more than 1 million since 1990 Whilst indoor air pollution be still one of the lead risk factor for mortality , and the largest risk factor at low income , the world have also make significant progress in recent decade . Globally , the number of annual death from indoor air pollution have fall by more than 1 million since 1990 . As we see in the visualization , in 1990 an estimate 2.7 million die prematurely as a result ; by 2017 this have fall to 1.6 million . This mean that despite continued population growth in recent decade , the total number of death from indoor air pollution have still decline . Indoor air pollution death have decline in most country We have see this progress across a large number of country . In the scatterplot you see the comparison of the number of death from indoor air pollution in 1990 ( show on the y-axis ) versus the number in 2017 ( on the x-axis ) . The grey line here mark where the number of death would be equal in both year ; country which lie above the line have a higher number of death in 1990 than in 2017 ; and the opposite be true for country below the line . Most country lie above the grey line , mean most have see a decline in the number of death from indoor air pollution in recent decade . Death rate have decline in almost all country in the world Which country in the world have make progress on tackle indoor air pollution in recent decade ? Almost all country have . In the scatterplot here we see the comparison between the death rate from indoor air pollution in 1990 ( show on the y-axis ) versus the death rate in 2017 ( on the x-axis ) . The grey line here mark where the number of death would be equal in both year ; country which lie above the line have a higher number of death in 1990 than in 2017 ; and the opposite be true for country below the line . Almost all country – with the exception of Zimbabwe – lie above the grey line . This mean progress have be make almost everywhere in the world in recent decade . How to make progress against indoor air pollution ? IN THIS SECTION • Indoor air pollution result from poor access to clean cook fuel • Poorer household have a higher dependence on solid fuel • Access to clean fuel for cook Indoor air pollution result from poor access to clean cook fuel Indoor air pollution result from the burning of solid fuel such as crop waste , dung , charcoal and coal for cooking and heating in household . Burning these fuel produce particulate matter – a major health risk , particularly for respiratory disease . The burning of such fuel in enclosed space such as small household be a major risk factor for exacerbation of these disease . Low-income household tend to rely on solid fuel for cooking because cleaner fuel be either unavailable or too expensive . We therefore see a strong link between death rate from indoor air pollution and access to clean fuel for cook . This be show in the visualization : here we see that country with the highest death rate from indoor air pollution be those with very low access to clean fuel ( i.e . have a high dependence on solid fuel instead ) . As access to clean fuel and technology increase , death rate from household air pollution begin and continue to fall . 2.1 Exposure variable One way to determine the health effect of indoor smoke from solid fuel would be to apply the well-established exposure–response relationship from epidemiological study of outdoor , or ambient , concentration of Kirk R. Smith et al . 1437 Table 18.1 Major toxic pollutant of indoor air Pollutant Major indoor source Fine particle Fuel/tobacco combustion , cleaning , fumes from food be cook , e.g . from cook oil Carbon monoxide Fuel/tobacco combustion Polycyclic aromatic hydrocarbon Fuel/tobacco combustion , fumes from food be cook , e.g . from cook oil Nitrogen oxides Fuel combustion Sulfur oxides Coal combustion Arsenic and fluorine Coal combustion Volatile and semi-volatile organic compound Fuel/tobacco combustion , consumer product , furnishing , construction material , fume from food be cook , e.g . from cook oil Aldehydes Furnishing , construction material , cook Pesticides Consumer product , dust from outside Asbestos Remodelling/demolition of construction material Leada Remodelling/demolition of painted surface Biological pollutant Moist area , ventilation system , furnishing Free radical and other short-lived , highly Indoor chemistry reactive compound Radon Soil under building , construction material a Lead-containing dust from deteriorate paint be an important indoor pollutant for occupant of many household , but the most critical exposure pathway be not usually through air . See chapter 19 . Source : Zhang and Smith ( 2003 ) . the same pollutant ( see chapter 17 ) to the household exposure , call here the “ pollutant-based approach ” ( Smith and Mehta 2003 ) . There be a number of potential problem with such an approach , however , include : • Differences in pollutant mixture : Although particle be often use as an indicator pollutant , the composition of particle ( size , chemical composition , etc . ) as well as that of other pollutant varies from source to source , and also change with dispersion ( Rossi et al . 1999 ) . • Differences in exposure pattern : The daily pattern of indoor air pollution source varies from that of ambient source , with large peak correspond to cook and heat schedule ( Naeher et al . 2000b ) . • Differences in exposure level : Concentrations of particulate from the indoor combustion of biomass have be measure at level that be 10–50 time greater than in urban area of developed country , where the main epidemiology of pollutant have be perform . Extrapolating exposure–response relationship by such a large factor be problematic , particularly as there be indication that the relationship become more shallow at higher exposure ( Bruce et al . 2000 ) . • Relevance of health outcome address : Most study of outdoor air pollution have attempt to associate short-term change in exposure with acute health outcome . This do not address the long-term impact on chronic health outcome , nor do it necessarily focus on the health outcome that be responsible for the bulk of the burden of disease . In particular , ALRI , mostly in the form of pneumonia , be likely to be responsible for the largest burden of disease cause by exposure to indoor air pollution . • Data on concentration of particulate matter ( PM ) in indoor air1 be sparse . In addition , most measurement have be make for concentration of total particulate , which be less reliable indicator of risk than smaller particle ( PM10 or PM2.5 ) . An alternative approach , consistent with that use in most epidemiological study in develop country , be to divide the population into category of people that be expose or not expose to smoke from solid fuel , on the basis of fuel use and ventilation . Although necessary here , owe to the current lack of exposure data , this method overlook the large variability of exposure within each of these group ( Naeher et al . 2000a ) . Furthermore , the method base on use of fuel be affect by the first of the shortcoming list above , as the same broad category of fuel may produce different mixture of pollutant in different setting . We also recognize that exposure from cook and heat 1438 Comparative Quantification of Health Risks can differ considerably because of different conversion technology . It be not possible to distinguish between the two end-uses in most case , however . To account for difference in other factor ( e.g . housing ) that would affect level of pollution ( Mehta and Smith 2002 ) , we include a second component in the exposure variable , which we refer to as the “ ventilation factor ” . The final exposure variable in the population be define as : We compile a database of household use of solid fuel , from which the prevalence of household use of solid fuel be estimate for each subregion.2 Using know value from this database , a statistical model be develop to predict national use of solid fuel for country without data . Ventilation factor be assign on the basis of qualitative evidence , to account for difference in type of cooking and heating appliance and housing . 2.2 Theoretical-minimum-risk exposure distribution The theoretical minimum for this risk factor be clearly no use of solid fuel for the production of household energy ; this have already be achieve in many population . In reality , of course , there would still be exposure to pollution from liquid and gaseous fuel , which might be further reduce through a switch to use of electricity or of very wellventilated cooking condition . 2.3 A database of household use of solid fuel A database of household use solid fuel , express as a percentage of all household , be compile for 52 country in 10 subregions , in order to estimate global household use of solid fuel ( see Table 18.2 ) . Although the data be acquire from study conduct at different time in the past decade , fuel-use pattern be unlikely to have change drastically within this time frame ( International Energy Agency 2002 ; World Resources Institute 2000 ) . Out of necessity , the data be gather from various source use different and , at time , non-validated methodology . We thus have to make many assumption in order to facilitate subregional comparison and data manipulation associate with solid fuel use . No household be report to be use solid fuel for cook in AMR-A , EUR-A , EUR-C and WPR-A , presumably because country in these subregions have already shift to cleaner fuel . In many country where large proportion of the population cook with solid fuel , data on household energy be widely , although not universally , available . In some case , the data come directly from national census information or energy use statistic , which state explicitly the number or fraction of household that rely predominantly on solid fuel for their energy need ( Government of Botswana 1991 ; Government of Brazil 1991 ; Government of Ecuador 1990b ; Government of Ethiopia 1998 ; Government of India 1991b ; Government of Mexico 1990b ; Government of Nigeria 1990 ; Government of Zimbabwe 1992 ) . For example , information on the main fuel use for cooking be collect during the house listing of the census of India each decade ( Government of India 1991b ) . These data , disaggregated into urban and rural sector , be available at the district level ( in India , a district contain about 2 million people ) . In some country , where census be infrequent and/or data on residential energy use be not collect , household survey be an important source of information . Some of these household survey , such as the widely conduct Demographic Health Surveys be repeat , while others may be conduct only once . For example , primary household energy estimate for 22 country in Africa , base on household survey with sample size range from 1000 to > 14000 household , be include in a database of development indicator for Africa , compile by the World Bank ( 2000 ) . In China , data be available in the form of aggregate annual residential fuel consumption at the provincial level , disaggregated by urban and rural area ( Government of China 1996 ) . Cooking and heat energy be distinguish use a simple model that account for the average number of “ heating day ” in each province , base on a 30-year average from 1951–1980 ( Lin 1995 ) . A small amount of energy ( 2kg-coal equivalent per household per heat day ) be consider to be heat fuel and subtract from the mix of solid fuel in each province . The remain heating-adjusted cooking fuel be then normalize to “ useful energy ” use typical conversion efficiency for each fuel–stove combination report ( Zhang et al . 2000 ) . The proportion of useful cook energy attribute to each fuel type per household in each province be take to represent the number of household use that fuel . This analysis be repeat for each of the province in China3 and aggregate to give a national total . It be estimate that in 1996 nearly 80 % of the household in China use solid fuel . Many country produce national estimate of solid-fuel use , but only a minority collect specific information on fuel use at the household level . Evidence from 10 country ( Bangladesh , Ecuador , Indonesia , Mexico , Myanmar , Nepal , Pakistan , the Philippines , Thailand and Viet Nam ) indicate that national and household level of solid-fuel use be highly correlate ( R2 =0.75 ) . It should be note , however , that this relationship hold true when solid fuel be not heavily use in industry . This correlation be use to estimate use of solid fuel by household in nine coun1442 Comparative Quantification of Health Risks try ( Afghanistan , Algeria , Egypt , the Islamic Republic of Iran , Lebanon , the Libyan Arab Jamahiriya , Morocco , Tunisia and Turkey ) where only information on national use of solid fuel be available . For three country ( Angola , the Democratic Republic of the Congo and the Sudan ) , in which a large fraction of the total national energy consume ( > 70 % ) comprise biomass fuel ( World Resources Institute 2003 ) , household use of solid fuel be assume to be 100 % . In other country , include Bangladesh , Indonesia , Myanmar , Nepal , the Philippines , Thailand , Viet Nam and Pakistan ( FAO 1997a , 1997b ; Government of Indonesia 1995 , 1996a ; Government of Pakistan 1997 ) , aggregate data on annual residential fuel consumption be available . In these case , the percentage of household use solid fuel be estimate accord to the quantity of fuel consume . The fraction of the population of each subregion cover by the country for which some data be available , and the prevalence of solid-fuel use accord to these data be give in Table 18.3 . Data on specific type of solid fuel ( i.e . use of coal v biomass ) be limit to India and China , but this factor be also likely to be important in other country in which no estimate be make , include South Africa and Pakistan . 2.4 A model to predict national use of solid fuel Using know value from the database of household use solid fuel , a statistical model be build to predict national use of solid fuel accord to a number of development parameter . The model be then apply to country where no data on household fuel use exist . This method also allow for the estimation of statistical uncertainty ( i.e . exclude uncertainty in available data and the validity of model ) surround each prediction.4 As a country develop , household gradually switch from use solid fuel to use cleaner liquid and/or gaseous fuel . Although the picture be often more complex at local and household level , it be assume here that this generally hold true over the long term on a subregional scale , a trend well-established by current , albeit cross-sectional , international comparison . After a certain level of economic growth have be achieve , it be assume that country will shift away from cook entirely with solid fuel . The use of solid fuel for heating may continue , however , especially in area that be rich in coal and wood . For country for which data be not available , a model base on the parameter describe in Table 18.4 be use with stepwise linear regression . With a gross national product ( GNP ) of US $ 4420 per caput in 1999 , Brazil be the richest country in the database to have significant level of cook with solid fuel ( 27 % of household ) . To avoid extrapolate the model to area where it may be inappropriate , estimate be make only for country with a GNP of < US $ 5000 per caput in 1999 . All country with a GNP of > US $ 5000 per caput in 1999 be assume to have make a complete transition to clean household-cooking system , either with cleaner liquid or gaseous fuel , or electricity or , where solid fuel be still use for cook or heating , to fully ventilated appliance . As use of traditional fuel ( as a percentage of national energy use ) be highly correlate with GNP per caput , stepwise linear regression eliminate GNP per caput when both variable be enter together . If use of traditional fuel be not enter , it be essentially replace by GNP per caput in the model , with little impact on model fit or standard error ( Table 18.5 ) . Two model to predict fuel use be assess , one employ GNP per caput and the other use of traditional fuel ( as a percentage of national energy use ) as predictor variable . Use of traditional fuel , which include use of fuel-wood , bagasse ( biomass remain after process sugar-cane ) , charcoal , animal waste , agricultural residue , and other vegetable biomass waste , be express as a percentage of total fuel use at the national ( as oppose to the household ) level , on an energy-equivalent basis . Like household use of solid fuel , use of traditional fuel at the national level be highly correlate with GNP per caput ( Figures 18.1 and 18.2 ) . Information on GNP per caput be more reliable , be update more routinely , and be available at the national level for nearly all country . Therefore , we use the model include GNP per caput as a predictor , rather than the model use use of traditional fuel . The final model be show in Table 18.6 and include percentage of the rural population , GNP per caput ( log-transformed ) , petroleum use per caput , and location within the EMR subregions ( enter as a dummy variable ) . Other potential variable be drop from the model in stepwise linear regression . This model be use to predict percentage of household use solid fuel in all country where these value be unknown ( see Figure 18.3 ) . In order to force the percentage of household use solid fuel to lie between 0 % and 100 % , estimate for the 23 country with predicted value of < 0 or > 100 be convert to 0 and 100 , respectively . Known ( for all country in the household fuel-use database ) and predict estimate of use of solid fuel at the country level be aggregate into subregional estimate of household solid-fuel use ( Table 18.7 ) . The subregions with the least coverage be those that have the highest level of economic development , i.e . those subregions that be least likely to have high proportion of household solid-fuel use because people have , for the most part , already shift to cleaner fuel and cook technology . We assume that the fraction of the population expose be the same as the fraction of household use solid fuel . This assumption be likely to underestimate exposure since solid-fuel-using household be more likely to be rural and of low socioeconomic status , and be thus likely to have more member than the subregional average . 2.5 Assigning ventilation factor Since people in different part of the world use different cooking and heating appliance and have different type of housing , ventilation must also be take into account when estimate exposure . Here , the term “ ventilation ” encompass both ventilation-related characteristic of the stove ( such as the presence of a chimney that vent to the outside of the house ) and characteristic of the kitchen ( build material , architectural feature that influence indoor air quality , location of the kitchen with relation to live area , etc. ) . Although we have no data on ventilation condition accord to subregion , we hypothesize that ventilation be a function of climate and development ( UNCHS 1996 ) . As describe above , country with a GNP per caput of > US $ 5000 be essentially assign an estimated exposure of 0 , that be , any use of solid fuel in the household be assume to be undertake in fully-vented appliance , with no re-entry of the pollution into the household . In the absence of further information ( as describe below ) , all other country be assign a ventilation factor of 1.0 . In country of eastern Europe and the former Soviet Union , a long history of household use of solid fuel under cold climatic condition and relatively high standard of living , before the recent economic decline , lead to the development of energy technology with far fewer indoor emission and , consequently , less exposure per unit of solid fuel burn . Therefore , we set the ventilation factor at 0.2 for EUR-B and EUR-C . In China , the widespread national improved-stove programme have disseminate cook stove with chimney to three-quarters of rural household use solid fuel since 1981 ( Goldemberg et al . 2000 ; Smith et al . 1993 ) , result in decreased effective exposure . The ventilation factor for China be set at 0.25 for child health outcome , because even welloperating , improved biomass stove with chimney be still responsible for some exposure ( Sinton et al . 1995 ) . We set China ’ s ventilation factor at 0.5 for adult health outcome , as current disease pattern for adult partly reflect exposure before the introduction of improved stove . India , the only other country with a long-term national stove-improvement programme , have have only mixed success , with relatively low stove lifetime and national coverage ( NCAER 2002 ) . The ventilation factor be therefore maintain at 1.0 for India . Tables 18.8 and 18.9 detail estimate exposure as define above for child age < 5 year and for adult . Separate estimate of exposure result from use of coal be present in Table 18.10 for adult only , as adult be affect by chronic health outcome ( see section 3 ) 2.6 Quantitative and qualitative source of uncertainty Estimates of use of solid fuel for country in the household fuel-use database be arbitrarily assign an uncertainty range of 5 % . The exposure classification system use here be binary ( expose to solid fuel or not expose ) , which be consistent with the available epidemiological literature . In reality , exposure to indoor air pollution from use of solid fuel result in a wide range of exposure , which vary accord to different type and quality of fuel and stave housing characteristic ( e.g . ventilation and size ) , cook and heat method , difference in timeactivity pattern ( time spend within the household and in close proximity to the pollution source ) and season ( Saksena et al . 1992 ) . Since the distribution of exposure be continuous , exposure would best be characterize as a continuous outcome , or at least better characterize by multiple category . As a result , the above binary categorization and uncertainty value significantly underestimate the true uncertainty in level of exposure . In addition , the need to use the fuel-prediction model for country without data obviously introduces uncertainty , only part of which may be reflect in the variance of the result obtain from the model . 3 . Estimating risk factor–disease relationship 3.1 Health outcome : evidence for causality and inclusion criterion Health outcome cause by indoor exposure to smoke from use of solid fuel be choose after a review of the epidemiological evidence available for each end-point , use electronic database , include Medline and TCMLARS ( Traditional Chinese Medical Literature Analysis and Retrieval System , an electronic database of Chinese journal ) . In addition , give that a large body of evidence come from develop country , literature be also obtain from other researcher and reputable developing-country journal not currently index in international database . Only article write or abstract in English be use , except for article on lung cancer , for which both the Chinese and the English literature be access , since , to our knowledge , only in China have there be significant use of coal in unvented household device in recent decade . GENERAL ASSESSMENT OF CAUSALITY The strength of the evidence for each end-point be determine on the basis of a structured assessment of causality , use Bradford Hill ’ s criterion for causality , include temporal relationship , strength of association , specificity , the presence of a dose–response relationship , biological plausibility , coherence , the existence of experimental evidence and consistency of association . As specificity , dose–response relationship , and experimental evidence be often difficult to assess for environmental exposure and health outcome with multiple cause or long latency period , we use the epidemiological evidence in conjunction with available information on emission , exposure and mechanism for indoor air pollution ( Smith et al . 2000 ; Zelikoff et al . 2003 ) . Three health outcome be determine to have strong enough evidence to be include : ALRI , COPD and lung cancer ( Table 18.11 ) . Information on assess causality for these outcome be give in section 3.3 and exclude outcome be discuss in section 3.2 . Children age > 5 year ( of school-age ) be exclude as they spend less time in the house than woman and child age < 5 year ; this be a conservative assumption as there be some exposure of this group , although level be unknown on a global scale ( Ezzati and Kammen 2001 ; Saksena et al . 1992 ) . Because of the limitation of the available epidemiological study , only risk in young child ( age < 5 year ) and adult be include . Available data indicate that men be also affect by those outcome consider for woman , but presumably at lower risk than woman because of lower exposure . Adults age 15–30 year be exclude because the chronic disease of concern ( COPD and lung cancer ) have not yet become manifest in this group . Obviously , however , development of these disease in later year be partly cause by exposure at these and younger age . 1452 Comparative Quantification of Health Risks Table 18.11 Diseases associate with use of solid fuel and population affect that be include in the analysis Disease Population affect Acute lower respiratory infection ( ALRI ) Children age < 5 year Chronic obstructive pulmonary disease ( COPD ) Females and male age ≥30 year Lung cancer ( coal use only ) Females and male age ≥30 year 3.2 Excluded health outcome OUTCOMES WITH INSUFFICIENT EVIDENCE A number of important disease that be potentially associate with use of solid fuel have not be include in this analysis owe to insufficient or lack of direct evidence on causality . Lack of inclusion do not necessarily imply inconclusive finding . Rather , it refer to a relatively small set of finding , suggest that additional , carefully conduct study be need to strengthen the evidence base . Asthma On the basis of the usual measure ( concentration of small particle , PM2.5 ) , typical exposure to indoor smoke from use of solid fuel be much higher than those for urban outdoor pollution ( García-Marcos et al . 1999 ) and ETS ( Strachan and Cook 1998 ) , with which asthma have be frequently associate . In addition , a study of child age < 5 year in Malaysia find increase risk associate with the burning of mosquito coil , another important indoor source of PM2.5 ( Azizi et al . 1995 ) . Studies in China ( Xu et al . 1996a ) and Kenya ( Mohamed et al . 1995 ) have quantitatively associate asthma in child of school age and in adult with various measure of indoor pollution from solid-fuel use . As the report background rate be low in most developing country , however , asthma contributes relatively little to the total burden of death or DALYs from indoor air pollution . Cataracts and other visual impairment Two case–control study in India have find an increase risk of cataract among people use biomass fuel ; Mohan et al . ( 1989 ) determine an odds ratio of 1.6 ; Zodpey and Ughade ( 1999 ) find an adjusted odds ratio of 2.4 . Evaluation of the National Family Health Survey of India ( NFHS 1995 ) find a somewhat lower rate for partial blindness ( odds ratio of 1.3 ; Mishra et al . 1999a ) , but no significant difference for total blindness . There be also evidence that exposure to ETS be associate with cataract ( West 1992 ) and animal study show that cataract can be cause by wood smoke ( Rao et al . 1995 ; Shalini et al . 1994 ) . Indoor air pollution may also be link to blindness through trachoma ( Prüss and Mariotti 2000 ) . Two unadjusted study in the United Republic of Tanzania find such a link ( Taylor and West 1989 ; West and Lynch 1989 ) although another in Ethiopia find cook in a central room to be protective , perhaps through reduction of fly ( Sahlu and Larson 1992 ) . Perinatal effect One study in India find an adjusted excess risk of stillbirth of 50 % among woman use biomass fuel during pregnancy ( Mavalankar et al . 1991 ) , and two Chinese study of urban ambient pollution , from the Kirk R. Smith et al . 1453 same group of researcher , also find a strong relationship between concentration of particulate and pre-term delivery ( Xu et al . 1995 ) and low birth weight ( Wang et al . 1997 ) . Low birth weight be also find to be associate with household exposure to biomass smoke in Guatemala ( Boy et al . 2002 ) . Intrauterine mortality , low birth weight , prematurity , and early infant death have be significantly associate with urban outdoor pollution at much lower concentration than those typically find in household that use biomass ( Bobak 2000 ; Loomis et al . 1999 ; Pereira et al . 1998 ; Ritz and Yu 1999 ; Scram 1999 ; Woodruff et al . 1997 ) . Exposure of non-smoking pregnant woman to ETS have be associate with low birth weight in a meta-analysis of 17 study ( Windham et al . 1999a ) , with low cognitive development ( Johnson et al . 1999 ) , but not with spontaneous abortion ( Windham et al . 1999b ) . Low birth weight be a risk factor for a number of childhood ( Walsh 1993 ) and , probably , adult ( Barker 1997 ) disease , not just those of the respiratory system . The potential pathway by which indoor cook smoke may cause low birth weight be give in Figure 18.4 . Although this mechanism seem likely to be important in some part of the world , at present it be difficult to provide a quantitative estimate of the potential burden , and it be not attempt here . Tuberculosis Recent study in India and Mexico have suggest that indoor air pollution from use of solid fuel may be a risk factor for active tuberculosis . A statistically significant relationship have be find between report use of biomass fuel and incidence of tuberculosis in 260000 adult age > 20 year . Indeed , woman in household use biomass fuel be find to be 2.7 ( 95 % CI 1.9–4.0 ) time more likely to have tuberculosis than woman in household use cleaner fuel , even after correction for a range of socioeconomic factor ( Mishra et al . 1999b ) . In addition , an unadjusted but significant odds ratio of 2.5 have be report for clinically-confirmed tuberculosis in adult male and female householder age 16–60 year use wood or dung cake as fuel ( Gupta and Mathur 1997 ) . Although these study be not able to address smoking as a possible confounder , two study in Mexico City have find an association between exposure to wood smoke and incidence of tuberculosis , after take smoke into account ( Perez-Padilla et al . 1996 , 2001 ) . A study in China also find exposure to outdoor air pollution to be associate with tuberculosis ( Xu et al . 1995 ) . Animal study have show that wood smoke cause immune suppression in the respiratory system ( Thomas and Zelikoff 1999 ; Zelikoff 1994 ) . Other health effect not include • Interstitial lung disease have be associate with long-term exposure in several study ( Dhar and Pathania 1991 ; Gold 2000 ; Ramage et al . 1988 ; Sandoval et al . 1993 ) . • Early study in Africa seem to implicate wood smoke as a cause of nasopharyngeal cancer , but this association be not bear out by later study in Asia ( Smith 1987 ; Smith and Liu 1994 ) . • Two study in Brazil have show increase risk of upper aerodigestive tract cancer , with adjust odds ratio of 2.7 ( Pintos et al . 1998 ) and 2.5 ( Franco et al . 1989 ) . • An association have be show with cervical neoplasia among HPVinfected woman in Honduras , with an adjust odds ratio of 5.7 after 35 year or more of cooking over an open fire ( Velema et al . 2002 ) . • Ischaemic heart disease have be associate with exposure to outdoor particulate air pollution ( Ponka and Virtanen 1996 ; Pope et al . 1992 ; Schwartz 1993 ; Schwartz and Dockery 1992 ; Schwartz and Morris 1995 ) and ETS ( Steenland et al . 1998 ) in some study , both at much lower level of exposure than for indoor air pollution ( see chapter 17 ) . Kirk R. Smith et al . 1455 EXCLUDED OUTCOMES ASSOCIATED WITH USE OF SOLID FUEL , BUT NOT CAUSED BY EXPOSURE TO AIR POLLUTION The use of solid fuel for household cooking and heating involve a range of activity with potential health implication that be separate from those involve the pollution create . The most important involve the harvesting of the two major type of fuel . • The harvesting of biomass in rural setting in develop country may involve regular carriage of heavy load for long distance , with consequent physical strain and food energy demand , along with exposure to such hazard as snake-bite , leech and assault ( crime ) . Women and child typically bear the greatest burden of such harvesting , although there be much variation across the world . • Coal mining be one of the most hazardous occupation in the world , particularly in develop country in small mine from which much household fuel be obtain . In addition , the extra time take to harvest , store , and prepare solid fuel be time that be potentially deduct from other pursuit that be associate with health benefit , such as child care or the generation of the household income . Considering that the counterfactual distribution be cook with nonsolid fuel ( rather than no cooking at all ) , there be also category of health risk that be avoid by the use of solid fuel : • fire and explosion relate to household use of liquid and gaseous fuel ; • poison cause by ingestion of household kerosene ; • risk inherent in the operation of the national and international petroleum fuel cycle require to provide liquid and gaseous fuel ; • risk involve in provide electricity for household cooking , such as coal mining , air pollution from power plant , accident involve nuclear and hydroelectric dam , etc . ; and • additional risk of mosquito-borne disease owe to absence of repellence from household smoke produce by solid fuel . In its current form , the system limit of this comparative risk assessment ( CRA ) do not encompass any of these health effect , positive or negative , that be not directly cause by exposure of human to pollution in the household . EXCLUDED OUTCOMES ASSOCIATED WITH SPECIALIZED AIRBORNE PRODUCTS OF INDOOR COMBUSTION There be several related source of indoor pollution not cover by this analysis that may be locally important in some country . However , too 1456 Comparative Quantification of Health Risks few data be available regard exposure to extrapolate these risk to global burden , although we suggest that these source represent potential research topic , as well as priority for determine exposure distribution , in order to improve the estimated burden of indoor air pollution . • Smoke from cook oil : study in China ( include the Province of Taiwan ) show relative risk for lung cancer of 3–5 for Chinese-style cooking in a wok with certain cooking oil ( Ko 2000 ; Zhong et al . 1999b ) . • Exposures to trace quantity of toxic element result from indoor use of coal in China and elsewhere : significant and widespread impact from exposure to fluorine and arsenic have be report in China ( Finkelman et al . 1999 ) and can be expect to occur wherever coal fuel be contaminate with such toxic element . • Smoke from incense and mosquito coil , which have be associate with ill-health in some Asian study ( Azizi et al . 1995 ) . 3.3 Evidence and exposure–risk relationship The estimate of relative risk5 and confidence interval use for ALRI , COPD and lung cancer be derive through formal meta-analyses of the available literature . Searches of the scientific literature be conduct use the Medline computerize bibliographic database , review of bibliography from previously-retrieved article and personal communication . In some case , the author of article that be lack data that be of interest for this analysis be contact and ask for clarification , and specific request for information be send to researcher in this field . Medline search be conduct use the following key word : • For ALRI : indoor air pollution , household fuel , smoke , acute respiratory infection ( ARI ) , pneumonia and ALRI • For COPD : indoor air , fuel , COPD , chronic obstructive lung disease ( COLD ) and chronic bronchitis • For lung cancer : indoor , air , fuel and lung cancer To be eligible for inclusion in the meta-analysis , study have to fulfil the following criterion : • to be a primary study , not a re-analysis or review ; • to examine some proxy for exposure to indoor smoke from the use of solid fuel for cook and/or heating purpose ; • to report an odds ratio and its variance , or sufficient data with which to estimate them ; and Kirk R. Smith et al . 1457 • to be write or abstract in English . Additionally , for lung cancer only , a Chinese colleague assist in a comprehensive search of the Chinese literature , extraction of the relevant data and translation . We consider both fixed- and random-effects model for the metaanalysis . As the result from both be similar , we use those from the fixed-effects model only . Owing to heterogeneity within study , we perform sensitivity analysis by stratify the study by potential source of heterogeneity , include assessment of exposure and adjustment for confounders . We do not use a random-effects model , even when statistical significance for heterogeneity be present , for the following reason . • Random-effects model assume that study be select from a population with a single underlying variance . This would be violate give the heterogeneity among the study in measure exposure . • Random-effects model assign the same weight to small and large study . This would be problematic for the study of this analysis because the number of case range from 45 to 500 . Smoking be an important risk factor for the disease associate with indoor smoke from use of solid fuel , especially lung cancer and COPD . At present , information on the combined effect of smoking and use of solid fuel be rare . To avoid possible overestimation of the burden of disease , therefore , attributable fraction for lung cancer and COPD cause by use of solid fuel be apply to disease burden remain after removal of the burden attributable to smoke . This be conservative in that some of the effect attributable to smoking could also be attribute to use of solid fuel . To ensure internal consistency within the CRA project , burden attributable to smoke be obtain from chapter 11 . Globally , about 51 % and 62 % , for men and woman respectively , of the total burden of COPD be not attributable to tobacco . ACUTE LOWER RESPIRATORY INFECTIONS A number of study in develop country ( Argentina , Brazil , the Gambia , India , Kenya , Nepal , Nigeria , South Africa , the United Republic of Tanzania and Zimbabwe ) have quantify the relative risk of ALRI for child in household that burn biomass ( Armstrong and Campbell 1991 ; Campbell 1997 ; Cerqueiro et al . 1990 ; Collings et al . 1990 ; de Francisco et al . 1993 ; Ezzati and Kammen 2001 ; Johnson and Aderele 1992 ; Kossove 1982 ; Mtango et al . 1992 ; O ’ Dempsey et al . 1996 ; Pandey et al . 1989b ; Shah et al . 1994 ; Victora et al . 1994 ) . Some work have also be do to identify possible mechanism in the developing country ( Verma and Thakur 1995 ) . Studies among native Americans ( Navajos in the south-western United States of America ) show a strong and significant association between ALRI and use of wood stove , at much lower level of indoor pollution than find in develop country ( Morris et al . 1990 ; Robin et al . 1458 Comparative Quantification of Health Risks 1996 ) . There be a larger group of study that show various childhood respiratory symptom ( e.g . cough , wheeze ) to be associate with exposure to smoke from solid fuel , but do not provide sufficient evidence to calculate odds ratio of ALRI itself . As all study include here use either ARI or ALRI , or death cause by ARI or ALRI , in child age < 5 year as a health outcome , we only estimate the burden of disease for child in this age group . A recent study in Kenya ( Ezzati and Kammen 2001 ) find association between use of solid fuel and ARI in adult ( both men and woman ) , suggest that , once time–activity pattern and spatial dispersion of smoke have be take into account , men and woman may have similar pattern of exposure–response . A single statistical analysis of all 15 study identify ( Table 18.12 ) be not appropriate because of the heterogeneous exposure variable and the diverse analytical strategy use by the investigator , especially with respect to potential confounding factor . To address this diversity , different subgroup of these study be use to conduct several metaanalyses , the result of which be remarkably consistent ; pool relative risk estimate increase with improved precision of exposure measure.6 C Outdoor air pollution be a major environmental health problem affect everyone in low- , middle- , and high-income country . Ambient ( outdoor ) air pollution in both city and rural area be estimate to cause 4.2 million premature death worldwide per year in 2016 ; this mortality be due to exposure to small particulate matter of 2.5 micron or less in diameter ( PM2.5 ) , which cause cardiovascular and respiratory disease , and cancer . People live in low- and middle-income country disproportionately experience the burden of outdoor air pollution with 91 % ( of the 4.2 million premature death ) occur in low- and middle-income country , and the greatest burden in the WHO South-East Asia and Western Pacific region . The latest burden estimate reflect the very significant role air pollution play in cardiovascular illness and death . More and more , evidence demonstrate the linkage between ambient air pollution and the cardiovascular disease risk be become available , include study from highly pollute area . WHO estimate that in 2016 , some 58 % of outdoor air pollution-related premature death be due to ischaemic heart disease and stroke , while 18 % of death be due to chronic obstructive pulmonary disease and acute lower respiratory infection respectively , and 6 % of death be due to lung cancer . Some death may be attribute to more than one risk factor at the same time . For example , both smoking and ambient air pollution affect lung cancer . Some lung cancer death could have be avert by improve ambient air quality , or by reduce tobacco smoking . A 2013 assessment by WHO ’ s International Agency for Research on Cancer ( IARC ) conclude that outdoor air pollution be carcinogenic to human , with the particulate matter component of air pollution most closely associate with increased cancer incidence , especially lung cancer . An association also have be observe between outdoor air pollution and increase in cancer of the urinary tract/bladder . Addressing all risk factor for noncommunicable disease – include air pollution – be key to protect public health . Most source of outdoor air pollution be well beyond the control of individual and demand concert action by local , national and regional level policy-makers work in sector like transport , energy , waste management , urban planning , and agriculture . There be many example of successful policy in transport , urban planning , power generation and industry that reduce air pollution : • for industry : clean technology that reduce industrial smokestack emission ; improve management of urban and agricultural waste , include capture of methane gas emit from waste site as an alternative to incineration ( for use as biogas ) ; • for energy : ensure access to affordable clean household energy solution for cooking , heating and lighting ; • for transport : shifting to clean mode of power generation ; prioritize rapid urban transit , walk and cycle network in city as well as rail interurban freight and passenger travel ; shift to cleaner heavy-duty diesel vehicle and low-emissions vehicle and fuel , include fuel with reduced sulfur content ; • for urban planning : improve the energy efficiency of building and make city more green and compact , and thus energy efficient ; • for power generation : increase use of low-emissions fuel and renewable combustion-free power source ( like solar , wind or hydropower ) ; co-generation of heat and power ; and distribute energy generation ( e.g . mini-grids and rooftop solar power generation ) ; • for municipal and agricultural waste management : strategy for waste reduction , waste separation , recycle and reuse or waste reprocessing ; as well as improve method of biological waste management such as anaerobic waste digestion to produce biogas , be feasible , low cost alternative to the open incineration of solid waste . Where incineration be unavoidable , then combustion technology with strict emission control be critical . In addition to outdoor air pollution , indoor smoke from household air pollution be a serious health risk for some 3 billion people who cook and heat their home with biomass fuel and coal . Some 3.8 million premature death be attributable to household air pollution in 2016 . Almost all of the burden be in low-middle-income country . Household air pollution be also a major source of outdoor air pollution in both urban and rural area . The 2005 WHO Air quality guideline offer global guidance on threshold and limit for key air pollutant that pose health risk . The Guidelines indicate that by reduce particulate matter ( PM10 ) pollution from 70 to 20 microgram per cubic metre ( μg/m ) , we can cut air pollution-related death by around 15 % . The Guidelines apply worldwide and be base on expert evaluation of current scientific evidence for : • particulate matter ( PM ) • ozone ( O3 ) • nitrogen dioxide ( NO2 ) • sulfur dioxide ( SO2 ) . Please note that the WHO Air quality guideline be currently under revision with an expect publication date in 2020 . Particulate matter ( PM ) Definition and principal source PM be a common proxy indicator for air pollution . It affect more people than any other pollutant . The major component of PM be sulfate , nitrate , ammonia , sodium chloride , black carbon , mineral dust and water . It consist of a complex mixture of solid and liquid particle of organic and inorganic substance suspend in the air . While particle with a diameter of 10 micron or less , ( ≤ PM10 ) can penetrate and lodge deep inside the lung , the even more health-damaging particle be those with a diameter of 2.5 micron or less , ( ≤ PM2.5 ) . PM2.5 can penetrate the lung barrier and enter the blood system . Chronic exposure to particles contributes to the risk of develop cardiovascular and respiratory disease , as well as of lung cancer . Air quality measurement be typically report in term of daily or annual mean concentration of PM10 particle per cubic meter of air volume ( m3 ) . Routine air quality measurement typically describe such PM concentration in term of microgram per cubic meter ( μg/m3 ) . When sufficiently sensitive measurement tool be available , concentration of fine particle ( PM2.5 or smaller ) , be also report . Health effect There be a close , quantitative relationship between exposure to high concentration of small particulate ( PM10 and PM2.5 ) and increased mortality or morbidity , both daily and over time . Conversely , when concentration of small and fine particulate be reduce , relate mortality will also go down – presume other factor remain the same . This allow policy-makers to project the population health improvement that could be expect if particulate air pollution be reduce . Small particulate pollution have health impact even at very low concentration – indeed no threshold have be identify below which no damage to health be observe . Therefore , the WHO 2005 guideline limit aim to achieve the lowest concentration of PM possible . WHO Air quality guideline value Particulate matter ( PM ) Guideline value Fine particulate matter ( PM2.5 ) 10 μg/m3 annual mean 25 μg/m3 24-hour mean Coarse particulate matter ( PM10 ) 20 μg/m3 annual mean 50 μg/m3 24-hour mean In addition to guideline value , the WHO air quality guideline provide interim target for concentration of PM10 and PM2.5 aim at promote a gradual shift from high to lower concentration . If these interim target be to be achieve , significant reduction in risk for acute and chronic health effect from air pollution can be expect . Achieving the guideline value , however , should be the ultimate objective . The effect of PM on health occur at level of exposure currently be experience by many people both in urban and rural area and in developed and develop country – although exposure in many fast-developing city today be often far higher than in developed city of comparable size . `` WHO air quality guideline '' estimate that reduce annual average fine particulate matter ( PM2.5 ) concentration from level of 35 μg/m3 , common in many develop city , to the WHO guideline level of 10 μg/m3 , could reduce air pollution-related death by around 15 % . However , even in the European Union , where PM concentration in many city do comply with guideline level , it be estimate that average life expectancy be 8.6 month lower than it would otherwise be , due to PM exposure from human source . In low- and middle- income country , exposure to pollutant in and around home from the household combustion of pollute fuel on open fire or traditional stove for cooking , heating and light further increase the risk for air pollution-related disease , include acute lower respiratory infection , cardiovascular disease , chronic obstructive pulmonary disease and lung cancer . There be serious risk to health not only from exposure to PM , but also from exposure to ozone ( O3 ) , nitrogen dioxide ( NO2 ) and sulfur dioxide ( SO2 ) . As with PM , concentration be often highest largely in the urban area of low- and middle-income country . Ozone be a major factor in asthma morbidity and mortality , while nitrogen dioxide and sulfur dioxide also can play a role in asthma , bronchial symptom , lung inflammation and reduced lung function . Ozone ( O3 ) Guideline value O3 100 μg/m3 8-hour mean The recommend limit in the 2005 Air Quality Guidelines be reduce from the previous level of 120 µg/m3 in previous edition of the `` WHO Air Quality Guidelines '' base on recent conclusive association between daily mortality and lower ozone concentration . Definition and principal source Ozone at ground level – not to be confuse with the ozone layer in the upper atmosphere – be one of the major constituent of photochemical smog . It be form by the reaction with sunlight ( photochemical reaction ) of pollutant such as nitrogen oxide ( NOx ) from vehicle and industry emission and volatile organic compound ( VOCs ) emit by vehicle , solvent and industry . As a result , the highest level of ozone pollution occur during period of sunny weather . Health effect Excessive ozone in the air can have a marked effect on human health . It can cause breathe problem , trigger asthma , reduce lung function and cause lung disease . Nitrogen dioxide ( NO2 ) Guideline value NO2 40 μg/m3 annual mean 200 μg/m3 1-hour mean The current WHO guideline value of 40 µg/m3 ( annual mean ) be set to protect the public from the health effect of gaseous . Definition and principal source As an air pollutant , NO2 have several correlate activity . At short-term , concentration exceed 200 μg/m3 , it be a toxic gas which cause significant inflammation of the airway . NO2 be the main source of nitrate aerosol , which form an important fraction of PM2.5 and , in the presence of ultraviolet light , of ozone . The major source of anthropogenic emission of NO2 be combustion process ( heating , power generation , and engine in vehicle and ship ) . Health effect Epidemiological study have show that symptom of bronchitis in asthmatic child increase in association with long-term exposure to NO2 . Reduced lung function growth be also link to NO2 at concentration currently measure ( or observe ) in city of Europe and North America . Sulfur dioxide ( SO2 ) Guideline value SO2 20 μg/m3 24-hour mean 500 μg/m3 10-minute mean A SO2 concentration of 500 µg/m3 should not be exceed over average period of 10 minute ' duration . Studies indicate that a proportion of people with asthma experience change in pulmonary function and respiratory symptom after period of exposure to SO2 as short as 10 minute . Health effect be now know to be associate with much lower level of SO2 than previously believe . A greater degree of protection be need . Although the causality of the effect of low concentration of SO2 be still uncertain , reduce SO2 concentration be likely to decrease exposure to co-pollutants . Definition and principal source SO2 be a colourless gas with a sharp odour . It be produce from the burning of fossil fuel ( coal and oil ) and the smelting of mineral ore that contain sulfur . The main anthropogenic source of SO2 be the burning of sulfur-containing fossil fuel for domestic heating , power generation and motor vehicle . Health effect SO2 can affect the respiratory system and the function of the lung , and cause irritation of the eye . Inflammation of the respiratory tract cause cough , mucus secretion , aggravation of asthma and chronic bronchitis and make people more prone to infection of the respiratory tract . Hospital admission for cardiac disease and mortality increase on day with higher SO2 level . When SO2 combine with water , it form sulfuric acid ; this be the main component of acid rain which be a cause of deforestation . WHO response WHO Member States recently adopt a resolution ( 2015 ) and a road map ( 2016 ) for an enhanced global response to the adverse health effect of air pollution . WHO be custodial agency for 3 air pollution-related Sustainable Development Goals indicator : • 3.9.1 Mortality from air pollution • 7.1.2 Access to clean fuel and technology • 11.6.2 Air quality in city . WHO develop and produce air quality guideline recommend exposure limit to key air pollutant ( indoor and outdoor ) . WHO create detailed health-related assessment of different type of air pollutant , include particulate and black carbon particle , and ozone . WHO produce evidence regard the linkage of air pollution to specific disease , such as cardiovascular and respiratory disease and cancer , as well as burden of disease estimate from exist air pollution exposure , at country , regional , and global level . WHO develop tool such as AirQ+ for assess the health impact from various pollutant , but also the Health Economic Assessment Tool ( HEAT ) to assess walking and cycling intervention , the Green+ tool to raise importance of green space and health , the Sustainable Transport Health Assessment Tool ( STHAT ) and the Integrated Transport and Health Impact Modelling Tool ( ITHIM ) . WHO be develop a Clean Household Energy Solutions Toolkit ( CHEST ) to provide country and programme with the tool need to create or evaluate policy that expand clean household energy access and use , which be particularly important as pollutant release in and around the household ( household air pollution ) contribute significantly to ambient pollution . CHEST tool include module on need assessment , guidance on standard and test for household energy device , monitoring and evaluation , and material to empower the health sector to tackle household air pollution . WHO assist Member States in share information on successful approach , on method of exposure assessment and monitoring of health impact of pollution . WHO be lead the Joint Task Force on the Health Aspects of Air Pollution within the Convention on Long-range Transboundary Air Pollution to assess the health effect of such pollution and to provide support documentation . The WHO co-sponsored Pan European Programme on Transport Health and Environment ( PEP ) , have build a model of regional , Member State , and multisectoral cooperation for mitigation of air pollution and other health impact in the transport sector , as well as tool for assess the health benefit of such mitigation measure . 1.1Definition of outdoor air pollution Air pollution be the presence in the air of one or more substance at a concentration or for a duration above their natural level , with the potential to produce an adverse effect ( derive from Seinfeld & Pandis , 2006 ) . This definition implicitly acknowledge that some substance that be consider to be air pollutant be present naturally . Although some air pollutant be solely anthropogenic , or nearly so ( e.g . chlorofluorocarbon and , for most purpose , some product of fossil fuel combustion ) , many , include ozone , particulate matter ( PM ) , sulfur dioxide ( SO2 ) , carbon monoxide ( CO ) , and polycyclic aromatic hydrocarbon ( PAHs ) , may also result from natural process ( Table 1.1 ) . Anthropogenic activity have lead to increase in many air pollutant to level that have adverse impact on human and environmental health . What be key in term of assess the potential health effect of air pollution be the level of the thousand of substance present , recognize that their composition varies from location to location , so the term “ air pollution ” can refer to very different exposure mixture . 1.1.1 . Characteristics of exposure to outdoor air pollution ( a ) Overview Exposure to outdoor air pollutant occur virtually continuously , across microenvironments , include indoors . The composition of the mixture and the absolute level of the air pollutant change , and many different air pollutant be present . The understanding of these exposure be complicate by the fact that the composition be seldom , if ever , well characterize in any environment , much less in all of the location an individual may traverse . Although most of the more-abundant pollutant be know and can be measure , many trace specie have not be identify , much less quantified routinely . Most trace pollutant typically be not measure ; instead , they be characterize as be part of a class of pollutant that be more readily measure together ( e.g . many organic compound be aggregate in measurement ) , or they may be link to other indicator . In light of the complexity discuss in this Monograph , there be no standardized way to characterize exposure to outdoor air pollution . This text focus on outdoor air pollutant , class of pollutant , pollutant mixture ( characterize by source and/or component ) , and pollutant indicator that be of specific interest as potentially lead to human cancer due to direct contact with human through their presence in outdoor air . This include exposure to outdoor pollutant and their reaction product outdoors and indoors . Exposures to pollutant generate indoors and contain indoors ( e.g . from cook and heat ) and to smoke be not consider , but pollutant generate indoors that migrate outdoors be consider . An increased focus be on those specific specie , class of pollutant , indicator , and mixture that be most relevant to cancer in human . There be multiple way to parse exposure to outdoor air pollution . First , the phase can be consider . Air pollutant be typically classify as be gaseous or PM , which contain suspension of very small particle ( with diameter of a few micrometres or less , down to nanometre scale ) that be liquid and/or solid matter . Complicating this classification be the fact that some pollutant move between phase ( e.g . semivolatile organic compound [ SVOCs ] ) . A second consideration be whether the pollutant be emit directly , and thus be primary ( e.g . dust ) , or be form in the atmosphere , and thus be secondary ( e.g . ozone ) . Some pollutant be both primary and secondary ( e.g . formaldehyde ) . Primary and secondary pollutant be describe in more detail in Section 1.2 . A third approach would be to consider where the exposure take place ( e.g . outdoors , in a car , or indoors ) and whether the pollutant mixture have be significantly alter by that microenvironment . A fourth consideration be the source of the pollutant mixture ( e.g . fuel combustion , chemical manufacture ) or whether the mixture be dominate by secondary compound . ( b ) Air pollutant Air pollutant and pollutant class of interest , their physical state , and their major source be summarize in Table 1.1 . Gaseous compound of interest include , but be not limit to : ozone ; nitrogen oxide ( NOx ) , which comprise nitrogen oxide ( NO ) and nitrogen dioxide ( NO2 ) ( in the atmosphere , NO be oxidize to NO2 , often rapidly in the presence of ozone ) ; SO2 ; and a myriad of volatile organic gas ( often refer to as organic gas or volatile organic compound [ VOCs ] ) . VOCs include aldehyde ( e.g . formaldehyde ) , ketone , aromatics ( e.g . benzene ) , alkane , and other class . PM be even more complex ( and less well understood ) . PM be characterize by both its size and its chemical composition ( see Fig . 1.1 ) . Particle size range across about 5 order of magnitude , from the nanometre scale ( e.g . as cluster of molecule ) up to grain of dust on the order of ten of micrometres . Although the distribution of particle size can be measure , most measurement capture the mass in specific size range ; for example , PM2.5 be PM with particle of aerodynamic diameter less than 2.5 μm . Other common size class be PM10 ( PM < 10 μm ) , total suspend particle ( TSP ) , and ultrafine PM ( PM < 0.1 μm ) . Coarse PM be take as the fraction with diameter from 2.5 μm to 10 μm . These size class be relevant to PM dynamic in the atmosphere and uptake in the human body , and reflect size range use in health study . Fig . 1.1 Major feature of atmospheric particle mass distribution Broad class of chemical compound can be consider in PM : inorganic ionic compound ( e.g . sulfate ) , metal oxide ( e.g . silicon oxide ) , and carbonaceous PM , which can in turn be classify as organic carbon ( OC ) and elemental carbon ( EC ) . EC be not truly pure carbon and be define by the measurement approach ; in some case , the term black carbon ( BC ) be use , again be define by the measurement approach . OC comprise hundred of compound , and although the common inorganic compound be reasonably well know and measure , only a fraction of the organic compound in PM have be specifically identify ( Schauer et al. , 1996 ) . Significant headway have recently be make to better understand the general structure of the unidentified compound ( Gentner et al. , 2012 ; Liu et al. , 2012 ) . In addition , some inorganic compound ( e.g . ammonium and nitrate ) and a myriad of organic compound ( e.g . SVOCs and intermediate-volatility organic compound ) can move between the condense ( particle ) phase and the gas phase . Atmospheric chemistry and transport , and infiltration indoors , alter the exposure mixtures . Ozone , a major component of photochemical smog , be form in the atmosphere due to reaction of NOx with VOCs and CO. Sulfate PM be derive primarily from the oxidation of SO2 ( a gas ) , follow by gas-to-particle conversion . Although formaldehyde be emit from some building material and chemical facility , more be form in the atmosphere from the oxidation of other organic compound , and be also destroy by further reaction . A potentially important , but less well understood , set of chemistry involves larger organic molecule . Oxidation of gaseous organic molecule can lower their vapour pressure , lead to condensation , and they thus become part of the OC mixture in PM . There can be multiple generation of reaction , and some reaction can also take place in or on the particle themselves . ( c ) Role of source in the composition of outdoor air pollutant Here , an overview be provide of the information describe in detail for each pollutant in Section 1.2 , focus on source . Fossil fuel combustion lead to elevated level of NOx , VOCs , and carbonaceous PM . Reactions involve these compound can further contribute to elevated level of other compound , such as ozone . Furthermore , any impurity in the fuel , for example sulfur and metal such as mercury , be also emit , sometimes as a gas ( e.g . SO2 ) or as PM ( e.g . fly ash , include metal such as selenium , vanadium , and nickel ) or as both ( e.g . mercury ) . The combustion process be complex , lead to a mixture of organic gas and PM that be just as complex , comprise specie that be originally present in the fuel ( e.g . benzene ) and product of incomplete combustion . Some product of incomplete combustion include partially oxidize organic component ( e.g . aldehyde ) , pyrolysis product ( e.g . 1,3-butadiene and carbonaceous aerosol ) , and more oxidized product such as CO and carbon dioxide ( CO2 ) and PAHs . Some of these organic specie of concern , include dioxin , quinone , and PAHs , be know or suspect carcinogen ( see Table 1.2 ) . The relative abundance of the constituent depend on the fuel type and combustion condition . Historically , spark-ignition engine typically produce relatively less PM and NOx than diesel , but more CO and VOCs . The carbonaceous PM from combustion be particularly complex ( for detail information , see HEI , 2013 and IARC , 2013a ) . Not all automobile emission be from the tailpipe ; brake and tyre wear can lead to copper and asbestos emission , as well as resuspend dust . Biomass fuel combustion lead to emission that can be similar to those from fossil fuel combustion , at least at the macroscopic level . Typically biomass combustion in open burning and in stove take place at lower temperature , lead to lower NOx emission but higher CO emission . Organic gas be emit , as be carbonaceous PM , along with impurity in the fuel ( e.g . potassium ) . The major difference be at the molecular level . Chemical plant and other industry have be responsible for elevated level of additional pollutant , include heavy metal and organic air toxics , and the compound involve be process-specific . The air toxics may be due to leakage in the plant or from incomplete combustion of flare use to control emission . Natural process also play a role . Wildland fire , natural and human-related , lead to emission of CO , NO , and organic gas ( include air toxics ) and PM . Lightning form NOx and ozone . Sea spray generate PM . Volcanoes emit sulfur oxide ( SOx ) , mercury , and other metal . Wind raise dust . Plants emit organic gas , some of which be highly reactive . Microbial activity lead to emission of NOx and ammonia , as well as bioaerosols . Biogenically emitted VOCs and NOx react to form ozone and organic PM . In many case , natural and anthropogenic source , such as natural VOCs and emission of NOx and SOx from fossil fuel combustion , interact to produce higher pollutant level than would be present with either type alone . Together , these source and the related atmospheric process lead to air pollutant mixture of tremendous complexity and variation , although at any one time most of the pollutant be present , just at vary level . Carbonaceous PM be a major component of outdoor PM in general , and it will take on a larger role as the level of other component of PM be reduce . Characterizing the component of primary and secondary carbonaceous PM be difficult , and even specialized study have typically identify and quantify a relatively small fraction of the potentially thousand of component ( Schauer et al. , 1996 ) . Therefore , carbonaceous PM be often classify more simply as EC and OC . To the extent that they have be characterize , carbonaceous PM emission typically resemble the component in the fuel they be derive from ( and , in the case of internal combustion engine , the lubricating oil ) , along with pyrolysis product . OC from internal combustion engine include PAHs , hopanes , steranes , and partially oxidized product of the underlying fuel and lubricant ( Zheng et al. , 2002 ; Gentner et al. , 2012 ; Isaacman et al. , 2012 ; Liu et al. , 2012 ; Zhao et al. , 2013 ) . OC from biomass combustion contain large amount of levoglucosan , a pyrolysis product of cellulose combustion . Atmospheric processing increase the complexity of the OC mixture . Secondary organic compound be form in part from the oxidation of gaseous organic compound , which then have a lower vapour pressure , lead to condensation . Organic compound that be originally emit as PM can volatilize , react , and then recondense . As discussed below , recent advance in analytical method be lead to a more detailed understanding of both emit and outdoor OC at the molecular level ( Gentner et al. , 2012 ; Isaacman et al. , 2012 ) . ( d ) Role of spatial scale of pollutant Concentrations of outdoor air pollutant vary across microenvironments , depend on source characteristic . A typical urban area be affect by the surround regional background pollutant , which have evolve from a variety of process ( e.g . chemistry , dispersion , and deposition , along with emission from natural process ) . Pollutant concentration in a city increase due to the variety of urban emission characteristic of populated area , lead to elevated level of primary and processed pollutant on spatial scale similar to the size of the city ( 1 km to ten of kilometre ) . On top of the urban mixture , locally elevated level of freshly emit pollutant occur over smaller scale ( 0 m to hundred of metre ) . Specific location that experience high level of air pollution include site near and on roadway ( include in vehicle ) , in fire plume , and near chemical facility . Karner et al . ( 2010 ) assess near-roadway pollutant gradient and find that CO concentration drop by 90 % to near background level in about 170 m , and that concentration of most other roadway-emitted specie drop to near background level by 570 m. There be also locally large exposure gradient around factory and industrial complex , although such gradient can be quite complex , depend on source characteristic . In contrast , plumes from power plant and fire , although they be dilute , can still be identify for ten to thousand of kilometre ( Ryerson et al. , 1998 ; Forster et al. , 2001 ) . Secondary pollutant ( e.g . ozone , sulfate , and part of the OC ) be find regionally with relatively smaller gradient . Dust have impact at multiple scale ; locally generate dust can have large impact locally , and dust storm can lead to intercontinental transport . For pollutant generated outdoors , concentration may be lower when the pollutant be transport indoors . However , since people tend to spend most of their time indoors , most of the exposure to those pollutant occur indoors . Also , indoor environment can lead to unique exposure as pollutant generate outdoors come into a very different environment , allow new chemical pathway to occur . Studies have quantify exposure to specific chemical or class of chemical across environment . 1.1.2 . Pollutant concentration A better perspective on the potential impact of air pollutant and air pollution be gain by consider typical level of the major pollutant ; more detailed description of concentration across region be give in Section 1.4 . For primary pollutant , urban concentration can be many hundred of time background level ; ozone level do not vary as dramatically . Approximate concentration range be give because pollutant concentration vary by order of magnitude between urban area and within an urban area , depend on the location or day ( or time of day ) . Although many measurement target a specific agent , the concentration can be an indicator of a mixture and the presence of other compound . Ozone be produce naturally , and pre-industrial level be estimate to have be approximately 30 μg/m3 . Background level be now about twice that , due to worldwide anthropogenic emission of NOx and VOCs , along with natural emission . Because ozone be produce photochemically , level be typically highest during sunny period with reduced atmospheric dispersion . In urban area with photochemical pollution , ozone level have reach much higher level ( likely > 1000 μg/m3 in Los Angeles in the 1970s ) , but current level in urban area be much lower ( e.g . summertime peak of < ~400 μg/m3 ) . Ozone react with NO , so in area where NOx emission be high and/or photochemical activity be low , ozone level be depress and can be well below background level . When elevated level of ozone be find in urban area , level of other photochemical oxidant be likely to be elevate as well , include aldehyde , organic acid , organonitrates , inorganic acid , hydrogen peroxide , and photochemically produce PM ( typically in the fine fraction ) ( Finlayson-Pitts & Pitts , 2000a , 2000b , and reference therein ) . PM level vary dramatically and depend on which size fraction be be consider ( Seinfeld & Pandis , 2006 , and reference therein ) . PM10 level be higher than PM2.5 level because that size range ( PM10 ) include the particle between 2.5 μm and 10 μm in diameter , in addition to particle with diameter smaller than 2.5 μm . The ratio between the two be location- and time-dependent . For 21 region analyse worldwide in 2005 , Brauer et al . ( 2012 ) estimate the ratio of annual average level ( PM2.5/PM10 ) to range from 0.13 to 0.94 . Areas with high level of dust or sea salt will have a considerably higher fraction of coarse PM , but if the PM be derive from combustion emission or atmospheric reaction , the PM2.5 can be a large proportion of the PM10 . In pristine area or after rainstorm , PM2.5 level can be below 1 μg/m3 . In more typical urban atmosphere , annual average level of PM2.5 be on the order of 4 μg/m3 to ten of microgram per cubic metre ( Brauer et al. , 2012 ; Cooper et al. , 2012 ) . Background level of SO2 be very low , less than 1 μg/m3 , except near natural source ( Finlayson-Pitts & Pitts , 2000b ) . In urban area or near point source , however , SO2 level can exceed ten of microgram per cubic metre . OC be present in urban atmosphere due to direct emission and photochemical production . Levels be typically on the order of 1–10 μg/m3 but can be higher during stagnation event . Levels of the individual organic compound that comprise OC be much lower , reflect the hundred of substance likely to be present . EC level be typically less than OC level , by about a factor of 2 or more , depend on the source distribution and photochemical activity . OC and EC level be often highly correlate , because they share some of the same source , and can also be correlate with level of CO and NOx ( e.g . HEI , 2013 ) . Background CO level be on the order of 50 μg/m3 , vary both spatially and temporally ( Seinfeld & Pandis , 2006 ) . In urban area with high level of spark-ignition engine emission , level be about 10 time background level and can be as high as 1000 or more time background level during adverse meteorological condition near source . Concentrations tend to peak in cooler period , when dispersion be reduce and cold-start emission from vehicle be increase . CO level in urban area in developed country have drop dramatically due to automotive emission control . Average lead concentration have decrease dramatically in country where regulation have reduce the lead content in on-road motor vehicle gasoline . In the USA , lead concentration in city drop from more than 5 μg/m3 in the early 1980s to about 0.1 μg/m3 after the use of leaded fuel be discontinue ( EPA , 2010 ) . Elevated lead concentration be still find where leaded fuel be use and around lead processing facility . NOx be emit naturally by combustion and from microbial activity , lead to level of 0.02–10 μg/m3 . Urban concentration can reach more than 1000 μg/m3 , although they be typically more on the order of 10–100 μg/m3 ( Seinfeld & Pandis , 2006 ) . A large number of other potentially hazardous air pollutant ( HAPs ; sometimes refer to as air toxics ) be find in the atmosphere . Different organization maintain different list of air toxics . In many case these pollutant be generally associate with specific source type and be find at elevated level in limited geographical area around point source ; exception include pollutant such as 1,3-butadiene from engine , PAHs from fossil and biomass fuel combustion , and mercury , which be long-lived and be deposit and re-emitted ( UNEP , 2008 ) . Special study have produce information on potential level of exposure . Levels of many of the compound can be find in Seinfeld & Pandis ( 2006 ) and reference therein , and be discuss below . 1.1.3 . Pollutants classify by IARC Outdoor air contain many substance that have be evaluate by IARC in the past ( Table 1.2 ) . The concentration of these agent in the atmosphere be often very low , much lower than the level that be find in environment where past epidemiological study link the substance to cancer may have occur . Recently , IARC classify diesel engine exhaust in Group 1 and gasoline engine exhaust in Group 2B ( IARC , 2013a ) . These be both significant component of urban air pollution mixture , and include PM and other compound . Outdoor Air Pollution , Low Birth Weight , and Prematurity Martin Bobak International Centre for Health and Society , Department of Epidemiology and Public Health , University College London , London , United Kingdom This study test the hypothesis , suggest by several recent report , that air pollution may increase the risk of adverse birth outcome . This study analyze all singleton live birth register by the Czech national birth register in 1991 in 67 district where at least one pollutant be monitor in 1990-1991 ( n = 108,173 ) . Maternal exposure to sulfur dioxide ( S02 ) , total suspend particle ( TSP ) , and nitrous oxide ( NO . ) in each trimester of pregnancy be estimate as the arithmetic mean of all daily measurement take by all monitor in the district of birth of each infant . Odds ratio of low birth weight ( < 2,500 g ) , prematurity ( < 37 week of gestation ) , and intrauterine growth retardation ( IUGR ; < 10th percentile of birth weight for gestational age and sex ) be estimate by robust logistic regression . The median ( and 25th and 75th percentile ) trimester exposure be 32 ( 18 , 56 ) pg/m3 for S02 ; 72 ( 55 , 87 ) pg/m3 for TSP ; and 38 ( 23 , 59 ) pg/m3 for NOx . Low birth weight ( prevalence 5.2 % ) and prematurity ( prevalence 4.8 % ) be associate with S02 and somewhat less strongly with TSP . IUGR be not associate with any pollutant . The effect on low birth weight and prematurity be marginally stronger for exposure in the first trimester , and be not attenuate at all by adjustment for socioeconomic factor or the month of birth . Adjusted odds ratio of low birth weight be 1.20 [ 95 % confidence interval ( CI ) , 1.11-1.30 ] and 1.15 ( CI , 1.07-1.24 ) for a 50 pg/m3 increase in SO2 and TSP , respectively , in the first trimester ; adjust odds ratio of prematurity be 1.27 ( CI , 1.16-1.39 ) and 1.18 ( CI , 1.05-1.31 ) for a 50 pg/m3 increase in SO2 and TSP , respectively , in the first trimester . Low gestational age account for the association between SO2 and low birth weight . These finding provide further support for the hypothesis that air pollution can affect the outcome of pregnancy . Key word air pollution , birth , epidemiology , low birth weight , pregnancy , premature birth . Environ Health Perspect 108:173-176 ( 2000 ) . [ Online 10 January 2000 ] http : //ehpnetl.nie/hs.nih.gov/docs/2000/108p173-176bobak/abstract.html The adverse effect of air pollution on mortality and respiratory symptom have be study extensively ( 1,2 ) . More recently , several study report an association between air pollution and birth outcome , such as birth weight ( 3-5 ) , premature birth ( 6 ) , or intrauterine growth retardation ( IUGR ) ( 7 ) . The literature on this subject be surprisingly sparse . An early U.S. study find that dustfall , a measure of air pollution , be relate to neonatal death with sign of prematurity ( 8 ) . A more recent British study , although not specifically design to study birth weight , do not find an excess in the frequency of low birth weight in a polluted area as compare to a control area ( 9 . With < 6,000 birth , however , the study have only a modest statistical power . A study in four residential area of Beijing , China , report a significant dose-response relationship between maternal exposure to sulfur dioxide ( SO2 ) and total suspended particle ( TSP ) during the last trimester and the risk of low birth weight ( 3 ) and premature birth ( 6 ) . A study of birth outcome in Teplice , Czech Republic ( 74 , find that the risk of IUGR be increase in term birth when mother be expose to high level of outdoor particulate matter < 10 pm in aerodynamic diameter ( PM10 ) in the first month of pregnancy , after control for maternal characteristic . A study of birth in southern California ( 5 ) find an association between ambient concentration of carbon monoxide and increase risk of low birth weight . Finally , our ecologic analysis of data on live birth in the Czech Republic in 1986-1988 also find an association between SO2 and low birth weight ; because individual data be not available , possible confounding by socioeconomic status could not be exclude ( 4 ) . Birth outcomes be a previously unexplored area in air pollution epidemiology , and it be not know whether the finding describe above can be replicate in different population or datasets . To address this question , I analyze data from the Czech national birth register link with the air pollution data . Methods Individual data on all singleton live birth register by the Czech national birth register in 1991 ( n = 126,752 ) be link with area base indicator of air pollution . The birth registration form be complete at birth by the doctor or nurse attend the delivery . The form contain the following information : date of birth ; birth weight ; gestational Environmental Health Perspectives * Volume 1 08 , Number 2 , February 2000 age ( estimate by the last menstruation period method ) ; parity ; birth order ; maternal age , education , and marital status ; and the nationality of the mother and father . The quality of the birth register have not be formally validate but the register be consider reliable ( 10 ) . The air pollution monitoring system in the Czech Republic be overseen by the Hydrometeorological Institute in Prague , where data be compile and their quality be check . Data from monitor station operate by the Hydrometeorological Institute and the Czech Public Health Service be consider the most reliable in the early 1990s , and they be use in the present analysis . All station use an old fashion but uniform monitoring technology : gravimetric method for TSP and colorimetric method for SO2 and nitrous oxide ( NO ) . Maternal exposure in each trimester of pregnancy be calculate for outdoor S02 , TSP , and NOX . These be estimate as the arithmetic mean of all 24-hr measurement by all monitor in the district of birth of each infant . In 1990-1991 , at least one pollutant be monitor in 67 of the total 85 district ( cover > 85 % of all birth ) . The geographic distribution of monitor be influence by financial possibility and by pollution level ( more polluted district be monitor more extensively ) , but the monitored district be similar to the remain 18 district in term of both pregnancy outcomes and socioeconomic factor . All three pollutant be not measure in each district ; therefore , the number of birth with data on exposure be different for individual pollutant . Most of the infant have data on S02 , follow by TSP , then NOX ( Table 1 ) . Address correspondence to M. Bobak , International Centre for Health and Society , Department of Epidemiology and Public Health , University College London , 1-19 Torrington Place , London WC1E 6BT , U.K. Telephone : 0171 391 1684 . Fax : 0171 813 0242 . E-mail : martinb @ public-health.ucl.ac.uk I thank M. Simek ( Czech Statistical Office ) for provide the data on birth ; J. Stehlik and J. Fiala ( Czech Hydrometeorological Institute ) for provide data on air pollution ; H. Pikhart ( University College London ) for link the database ; and A.J . McMichael , D. Leon , and P. Doyle ( London School of Hygiene and Tropical Medicine ) for valuable comment on an earlier draft of this paper . Received 1 June 1999 ; accept 24 August 1999 . 173 Odds ratio ( ORs ) of low birth weight ( < 2,500 g ) , prematurity ( < 37 week of gestation ) , and IUGR ( < 1 0th percentile of birth weight for gestational age and sex ) be calculate by robust logistic regression use the Huber formula [ subcommand `` cluster ( district ) '' in STATA statistical software ( 11 ) ] . This procedure take into account the fact that the exposure be area base , and that individual may be more similar to each other within district than between district . Several model be construct . First , crude effect be estimate . Second , crude effect be adjust for maternal age group , education , marital status and nationality , parity , and month of the birth . All maternal factor be relate to birth outcome in bivariate analysis . Finally , in the analysis of low birth weight , the effect of air pollutant be also adjust for gestational age . I also examine model where trimester-specific exposure to all three pollutant be adjust for each other , and model where all three trimester be enter simultaneously . In the initial analyse the association between quintiles of pollutant level and outcome be approximately linear . The pollutant be therefore model as continuous variable , and the effect be report as ORs for a 50-pg/m3 increase in mean pollutant concentration during a give trimester . Results Table 1 show the number of birth with data on exposure to individual pollutant , the median , and the 25th and 75th percentile of the mean trimester exposure . The exposure be high by Western standard , and the variation be largest for SO2 and NOX . Pollutant concentration in different trimester be mutually correlate ( Table 2 ) . The strong inverse association between the first and third trimester mean of SO2 and TSP be due to the strong seasonal variation in these pollutant . Table 3 show characteristic of the infant and the mother on which data on at least one pollutant be available . The prevalence of low birth weight be 5.2 % , and 4.8 % of birth occur before the 37th week of gestation . Socioeconomic confounding be a major threat to study of outcome such as low birth weight or prematurity , which be strongly relate to socioeconomic status . 174 Therefore , I examine the relationship between maternal education , nationality , and marital status to pollutant concentration . To be potentially confound , socioeconomic factor would need to be relate to exposure , i.e. , pollution . The difference in mean exposure by maternal education , marital status , or nationality be negligible , and no association be significant ( data not show ) . The only correlation coefficient stronger than ± 0.1 be positive ( and not statistically significant ) between maternal education and NOX . Low birth weight ( < 2,500 g ) be significantly associate with SO2 , somewhat less strongly with TSP , and not with NOX ( Table 4 ) . The crude association be not attenuate by adjustment for socioeconomic factor and the month of birth . ORs of low birth weight , adjust for sex of the infant , education , parity , age and marital status of the mother , and the month of birth appear marginally stronger for exposure in the first trimester . The adjusted ORs be 1.20 [ 95 % confidence interval ( CI ) , 1 . 11-1.30 ] and 1.15 ( CI , 1.07-1.24 ) for a 50-ig/m3 increase in mean SO2 and TSP concentration , respectively , in the first trimester . The association be approximately linear ; for example , the ORs for the second to fifth quintiles of SO2 in the first trimester be 1.06 ( CI , 0.96-1.16 ) ; 1.05 ( CI , 0.96-1.16 ) ; 1.22 ( CI , 1.10-1.36 ) ; and 1.26 ( CI , 1.11-1.43 ) , respectively , as compare to the first quintile ( p for trend < 0.001 ) . Further adjustment for gestational age eliminate the effect of SO2 but not those of TSP ( Table 3 , last column ) . The effect be substantially weaker in analysis restrict to term birth , as consistent with the strong influence of gestational age . In these analysis , the ORs be 1.10 ( CI , 0.96-1.26 ) for SO2 and 1.01 ( CI , 0.88-1.15 ) for TSP in the first trimester , after control for sex of the infant , education , parity , age and marital status of the mother , and the month of birth ( data not show ) . In analysis of birth weight as a continuous variable , an increase in SO2 and TSP by 50 pg/m3 in the first trimester be associate with a reduction in the mean birth weight by 11.4 g ( CI , 5.9-16.9 ) and 10.8 g ( CI , 3.1-18.4 ) , respectively . The two component of low birth weight , prematurity and IUGR , be then analyze NOX 1 0.79 0.67 2 0.76 separately . Prematurity ( gestational age < 37 week ) be also significantly associate with air pollution ( Table 5 ) . The adjusted ORs per 50-pIg/m3 increase in mean concentration during the first trimester be 1.27 ( CI , 1.16-1.39 ) for SO2 ; 1.18 ( CI , 1.05-1.31 ) for TSP ; and 1.10 ( CI , 1.00-1.21 ) for NOX . For each pollutant in each trimester , the effect on prematurity be stronger than those on low birth weight . Restriction of the analysis to premature birth without IUGR do not change these estimate ; adjust ORs be 1.26 ( CI , 1.14-1.40 ) for SO2 and 1.16 ( CI , 1.02-1.31 ) for TSP in the first trimester ( data not show ) . Effects on gestational age as a continuous variable be small ; a 50pg/m3 increase in the mean concentration of SO2 and TSP during the first trimester reduce the gestation by 0.056 week ( CI , 0.037-0.075 ) and 0.075 week ( CI , 0.049-0.101 ) , respectively . There be no significant association between pollutant concentration and IUGR . For example , the adjust OR be 0.91 ( CI , 0.80-1.04 ) and 0.89 ( CI , 0.75-1.06 ) for a 50-jig/m3 increase in SO2 and TSP in the first trimester , respectively ; all p-values be > 0.10 ( data not show ) . Restriction of the analysis to term baby with IUGR do not change the pattern , and the ORs be virtually identical to those in the full dataset ( data not show ) . Table 3 . Descriptive characteristic of infantsa and mothersa include in the analysis . Variable Mean ( SD ) birth weight ( g ) Prevalence of low birth weight ( < 2,500 g ) Mean ( SD ) gestational age ( week ) Prevalence of prematurity ( < 37 week ) Male sex of the infant Mean ( SD ) maternal age ( year ) Single mother Non-Czech mother Maternal education Primary Vocational Children 's Health * Air pollution , low birth weight , and prematurity I also explore the association between birth outcome and exposure in model with concentration of a give pollutant in all trimester , concentration of all pollutant during a give trimester , and concentration of all pollutant in all trimester . In pollutant-specific analysis , the effect of both SO2 and TSP on both outcome appear to be the strongest for exposure in the first trimester . In trimester-specific analysis , SO2 be the strongest predictor of both low birth weight and prematurity . In the model contain all three pollutant in all three trimester , SO2 in the last trimester and TSP in the first trimester appear to be relate to prematurity , and SO2 in the first and the last trimester appear to be relate to low birth weight . However , because of the collinearity between pollutant and trimester ( Table 2 ) , these analysis produce unstable estimate and be not report in detail . determinant of low birth weight or prematurity . On the other hand , the effect be not negligible ; they be several time larger than those on adult mortality as estimate from time-series study and be generally accept as causal ( 1 ) . The association of air pollution with birth outcome do not seem to be due to bias or confound , and this question deserve serious examination . See discussion , stats , and author profile for this publication at : http : //www.researchgate.net/publication/232808042 Urban Air Pollution Climates Throughout the World Chapter in Issues in Environmental Science and Technology · January 2009 CITATIONS READS 21 435 2 author : Ole Hertel . Michael Goodsite Ph.D. Aarhus University University of Adelaide 278 PUBLICATIONS 6,531 CITATIONS 80 PUBLICATIONS 4,230 CITATIONS SEE PROFILE SEE PROFILE Some of the author of this publication be also work on these related project : http : //www.elapseproject.eu/ View project NCoE NORD-STAR View project All content follow this page be upload by Ole Hertel on 31 May 2014 . The user have request enhancement of the download file . Urban Air Pollution Climates throughout the World OLE HERTEL * AND GOODSITE ABSTRACT The extent of the urban area , the local emission density , and the temporal pattern in the release govern the local contribution to air pollution level in urban environment . However , meteorological condition also heavily aﬀect the actual pollution level as they govern the dispersion condition as well as the transport in and out of the city area . The building obstacle play a crucial role in cause generally high pollutant level in the urban environment , especially inside street canyon where the canyon vortex ﬂow govern the pollution distribution . Of the pollutant dominate urban air pollution climate , particulate pollution in general together with gaseous and particulate polycyclic aromatic hydrocarbon ( PAHs ) and heavy metal be those where further ﬁeld measurement , characterization and laboratory study be urgently need in order to fully assess the health impact on the urban population and provide the right basis for future urban air pollution management . 1 Introduction In addition to other adverse health eﬀects , air pollution be estimate to cause about 2 million premature death worldwide annually.1 In this context particulate matter ( PM ) be generally believe to be the most hazardous of ambient pollutant , and it have be estimate that reduce ambient air concentration of PM10 from 70 to 20 mg m3 would lower the number of air quality relate death by approximately 15 % .1 More than half of the world ’ s population reside Issues in Environmental Science and Technology , 28 Air Quality in Urban Environments Edited by R.E . Hester and R.M . Harrison r Royal Society of Chemistry 2009 Published by the Royal Society of Chemistry , www.rsc.org 1 2 Ole Hertel and Goodsite 2 in city , where the highest air pollution exposure3 and associate negative health impact take place . Furthermore , the projection for the next 50 year indicate that the worldwide urban population will increase by two thirds.2 Urban air pollution have be increase in major city , especially those find in develop country ( such as in : Brazil , Russia , India , Indonesia and China ) as a result of rapid urbanisation . The cost to society of the associated health eﬀects be signiﬁcant and have be estimate to be approximately 2 % of the Gross Domestic Product ( GDP ) in developed country and 5 % of GDP in develop country ( www.unep.org/urban_environment/issues/urban_ air.asp ) . There may also be associate loss in productivity.4 1.1 Emission and Formation of Urban Air Pollution Urban air pollution arise from the competition between emission process which increase pollutant concentration , and dispersion , advection and deposition process that reduce and remove them . This chapter describe the diﬀerences in local urban pollutant level between city worldwide , and outline how these diﬀerences in pollution level reﬂect diﬀerences in emission density and emission pattern , but also in pollutant dispersion and removal process . The impact on pollution level of the dispersion and removal process be govern by the local meteorological condition , which also vary heavily with the physical location of the city . Air pollution concentration in an urban environment be naturally the result of local emission as well as contribution from pollution transport from more remote source ( see Figure 1 ) . The size of the city domain and the density of pollutant emission govern the local contribution to urban air pollution.5 Naturally , the temporal pattern in urban air pollution level be a function of variation in the local release , but just Concentration Street increment City increment Regional Distance City area Figure 1 A schematic illustration of the air pollutant contribution from regional transport , the city area and the street traﬃc . The relative magnitude of the various contribution depend on the consider pollutant and the actual dispersion condition ( govern by the meteorology ) . Urban Air Pollution Climates throughout the World 3 as important be the variation in the meteorological parameter that govern the dispersion and the pollutant transport in and out of the city . Besides the inﬂuence from temporal variation in emission and meteorology , the emission release height also play an important role . Air pollution emit from a high release height will in many case be transport out of the urban area before be disperse down to grind level ; depend on the size of the urban domain . Urban industry , power plant and other source for which the release come from tall chimney , contribute therefore only rarely to the local ground level air pollutant concentration inside the urban area . These pollutant source contribute primarily to the more regional air pollution . Pollutant emission relate to vehicular transport , local domestic heating and smaller industry have low release height [ less than 10 m above ground level ( a.g.l. ) ] . These release be not dilute as eﬃciently as generally the case for emission from tall release height ( more than 20 m a.g.l. ) . The contribution from ‘ ‘ low ’ ’ source therefore often dominate the pollutant concentration at ground level inside the urban area . A steady growth in vehicular transport and centralization of domestic heating have make road traﬃc the most important source of urban air pollution in many countries,6 include most industrialized nation . In respect to local contribution from diﬀerent sector there be generally signiﬁcant diﬀerences between develop and develop country . A comparison of two so-called mega-cities ( Beijing and Paris ) show that aerosol particle and volatile organic compound ( VOCs ) have a complex and multicombustion source in Beijing , whereas a single traﬃc pollution source completely dominate the urban atmospheric environment in Paris.7 Indoor air quality be a major health concern . In the developing country , emission from household use of fossil fuel in the year 2000 be estimate to account for 1.6 million death , mainly among woman and child in the poorest countries.8 In the present paper we focus on ambient air quality and related impact on human health . The actual ambient air pollutant load greatly vary from one city to another , but , generally , major urban area throughout the world have poor air quality , and , among these , the city in the developing country face the greatest challenge . WHO have compile a survey on typical range in ambient air concentration of four indicator pollutant , which be summarize in Table 1 . 1.2 Urban Pollution Levels and Indicators The highest urban air concentration of the classic pollutant like PM10 and SO2 be find in Africa , Asia and Latin America , whereas the highest level of secondary pollutant like O3 and NO2 be observe in Latin America and in some of the larger city and urban air shed in the developed country . The environmental and human health impact be particularly severe in city of about 10 million or more inhabitant – also know as mega-cities.9 Urban air 4 Table 1 Ole Hertel and Goodsite Ranges in annual average urban ambient air concentration ( mg m3 ) of PM10 , NO2 , SO2 and 1 hour average maximum concentration of O3 for diﬀerent region , base on a selection of urban data.1 Annual average concentration Region PM10 NO2 SO2 1 h max concentration O3 Africa Asia Australia/New Zealand Canada/United States Europe Latin America 40–150 35–220 28–127 20–60 20–70 30–129 35–65 20–75 11–28 35–70 18–57 30–82 10–100 6–65 3–17 9–35 8–36 40–70 120–300 100–250 120–310 150–380 150–350 200–600 pollution have become one of the main environmental concern in Asia , and especially in China where the pollution load in mega-cities like Beijing , Shanghai , Guangzhou , Shenzhen and Hong Kong be substantial . In these city , between 10 and 30 % of day exceed the so-called Grade-II national air quality standards10 by a factor of three to ﬁve time that of the WHO AQG ( air quality grade ) . These city have experience a 10 % growth in traﬃc each year over the last 5 to 6 year and , even with enhanced emission control , NO2 and CO concentration have remain almost constant over the same period of time . Use of air quality index ( AQIs ) be common tool in environmental management . A description of widely use index and how they be express mathematically be give in Gurjar et al.11 AQIs can be design to handle single or multi pollutant and may be use for compare the load in diﬀerent city or for describe the current load in relation to average load or air quality standard and target value . In a multi component AQI ( they apply the term MPI ) range over mega-cities throughout the world , the highest MPI value be find for Dhaka , Beijing , Cairo and Karachi with value about double those of Delhi , Shanghai and Moscow11 ( Figure 2 ) . 2 Sources in the Vicinity of the City Airports be usually locate in the vicinity of larger city and often mention as potential source of high pollution load in the urban area . In recent year , several study have thus be carry out to determine the potential impact of airport emission . These study generally point at an inﬂuence from the road traﬃc go to and from the airport , whereas the impact of aircraft emission have be find to be very limited . In a study carry out in Frankfurt Airport , signal from speciﬁc aircraft emission generally could not be identiﬁed , whereas emission from vehicle traﬃc on surround motorway have measurable impact on the air quality.12 A study from Munich Airport have similar ﬁndings.13 A study inside Heathrow Airport have show that between 5 and 5 Urban Air Pollution Climates throughout the World Tokyo New York São Paulo Mumbai Kolkata Shanghai Buenos Aires Delhi Los Angeles Osaka-Kobe Jakarta Beijing Rio de Janeiro Cairo Dhaka Moscow Karachi -2.5 Figure 2 -1.5 -0.5 0.5 1.5 2.5 Mega-cities pollution index ( MPI ) base on measurement of the classical air pollutant and aggregate into an index for total pollution level ( multi pollutant ) . The plot be reproduce from Gurjar et al.11 30 % of the local NOx contribution be relate to aircraft , whereas the remain 95 to 70 % be from road traﬃc.14 A recent study have indicate that ship traﬃc be responsible for about 60,000 lung cancer and cardiopulmonary death annually,15 but this outcome be link to the contribution from ship emission to the background PM load and not particularly relate to the urban air quality . Harbours may be a local source contribute to urban pollution , but study indicate that local road traﬃc often dominate the contribution from harbour . A study in the harbour of Aberdeen thus show a gradient of increase NO2 and soot concentration from the harbour towards the city centre,16 indicate the contribution from the harbour have very limited impact on the local air quality in comparison with the emission take place in the urban environment . Wood combustion in household be a grow concern in area with many wood stove that have relatively high local emission of PM in comparison with other anthropogenic pollution source . Investigations of wood combustion and air quality in developed country like New Zealand,17 Sweden,18 USA19,20 and Denmark21 have document that residential wood combustion may signiﬁcantly elevate the local PM concentration in outdoor air . As an example , emission inventory for Denmark point at wood combustion as the largest anthropogenic source of primary particle emission . 3 Impact of the Geography , Topography and Meteorology 3.1 Geography The location of the city have signiﬁcant impact on the dispersion condition , mainly since it aﬀects the local meteorological condition . The classical 6 Ole Hertel and Goodsite example be Los Angeles situate in a valley with frequent stagnant condition during temperature inversion . The stagnant condition lead generally to low wind speed , and little air exchange between the valley and the surround area . Hot and sunny climate and high emission from traﬃc , industry and domestic heating make the valley act like a large pollutant reaction chamber . This lead to high concentration of photochemical product like ozone , nitrogen dioxide and peroxy acetyl nitrate ( PAN ) . A comparison of nitrogen oxide ( NOx ) level in the street Via Senato in Milan , Italy and the street Jagtvej in Copenhagen , Denmark show similar concentration at the two site despite much higher traﬃc in the street of Copenhagen.22 It be show mainly to be a result of generally lower wind speed in Milan compare with Copenhagen . High wind speed and neutral condition prevail in Copenhagen , whereas low wind speed and stable or near stable condition be frequent in Milan . Copenhagen have a cold coastal climate whereas Milan have a warm sub-tropical climate and the local wind condition be furthermore aﬀected by the location inside the Po Valley . 3.2 Topography Some city have characteristic wind system as a result of local topography . An example of such eﬀects be the rise air over a warm mountain side during daytime often lead to local formation of cloud and release of precipitation . During night the system turn around and the cooling of the air in the mountain valley lead to stable condition that may cause local air pollution problem . The impact of Katabatic wind be another example , which aﬀects city along the Norwegian coast . The Katabatic wind be form when cold air mass move down-slope ( Katabatic be Greek for move down hill ) and meet the colder snow and glacier cover area , which then cool the air mass further , before the air ﬂoats out through a narrow cleft at the bottom of the hill . Usually the impact on air pollutant concentration be moderate , but they may lead for example to high level of local dust . Yet another example be the warm and dry Foehn wind form on the back-side of a mountain chain , e.g . on the north side of the Alps . When the wind be force over the mountain , the air be cool and release moisture . The air subsequently become warmer when it be move down-hill again . This system may then form an inversion and , e.g . reduce dispersion of local air pollutant . 3.3 Meteorology The ambient temperature in the urban atmosphere of larger city be generally a couple of degree Celsius higher than that find in the surround rural area . This feature be term the urban heat island eﬀect,23 and the explanation be that the city have a smaller albedo and therefore absorbs more energy compare with the surround rural area . There be in addition a high consumption of energy inside the city , as a result of domestic heating and intense road traﬃc , which Urban Air Pollution Climates throughout the World 7 again contributes to release of heat . Finally , the building and other urban construction form a shield for the wind , and this shield lead to less cooling of the surface inside the city . Since the building act as heat reservoir , the city have furthermore a less pronounced diurnal temperature variation compare with the rural area . In calm weather , an urban circulation cell may be form by warm air rise from the city . Some distance away , this heat air sink and return to the city at a low altitude . A similar phenomenon be know in coastal region , where a sea breeze may be form as a result of the temperature diﬀerence between the sea and land surface . A study in London show that the heat island circulation over the city mean that the wind speed be never below about 1 m s1 ( ref . 24 ) . This study show that the heat island eﬀect be very important during low wind speed condition in London where it may dominate the dispersion and thereby be limit for the highest local air pollution concentration , and this eﬀect may thereby be the limiting factor for the highest pollution concentration in the urban environment . 4 Pollutant Dispersion in Urban Streets ( see also chapter by Salmond and McKendry ) Traﬃcked street be air pollution hot spot in the urban environment ( Figure 1 ) . The concentration inside the urban street may be consider as the result of two contribution , one from emission from the local traﬃc in the street itself and one from background pollution enter the street canyon from above roof level:25 c ¼ cb þ c where c be the concentration in the street , cb the urban background contribution and cs the contribution from traﬃc inside the street itself . The background contribution furthermore arises from two contribution ; the ﬁrst of these be the contribution from nearby source in the urban area ( typically this will mainly be traﬃc in surround street ) , and the other contribution consist of regional ( source within a distance of a few hundred km ) and long range transport ( source place up to thousand of km away ) pollution . Naturally , the pollutant level in the urban street be strongly aﬀected by traﬃc emission take place inside the street itself . However , the concentration level and the distribution of air pollution inside the street be to a large extent govern by the surround physical condition . These physical condition heavily aﬀect the wind speed and especially the wind direction inside the street.25 The special airﬂow generate inside the street and around building obstacle may result in very diﬀerent concentration level at diﬀerent location in the street . The classical example be the street canyon vortex ﬂow ( Figure 3 ) , which physically govern the pollutant distribution inside the street canyon . The street canyon be characterise by the presence of tall building on both side 8 Ole Hertel and Goodsite wind Background pollution Recirculated pollution Leeward Figure 3 Direct emission Windward Illustration of the ﬂow and dispersion inside a street canyon . In the situation show , the wind above roof level be blow perpendicular to the street . Inside the street canyon a vortex be create , and the wind direction at street level be opposite to the wind direction above roof level . Pronounced diﬀerences ( they may be up to a factor of 10 ) in air pollution concentration on the two pavement be the result of these ﬂows . of the street . Within the vortex ﬂow relatively clean air from rooftop height be draw down at the windward face of the street , across the road at street level , in the reverse of the wind direction at roof top , bring pollutant in the road to the leeward face of the canyon . This result in pollution concentration up to 10 time higher on the leeward side compare with the windward side of the street . 5 Nitrogen Dioxide Pollution in Urban Areas ( see also chapter by Bloss ) Residence time for an air packet in the vicinity of an urban street be usually of the order of second to a few minutes,25 depend on the street topography , and therefore only very fast chemical conversion have time to take place . For example the chemistry of nitrogen oxide [ NOx : the sum of nitrogen monoxide ( NO ) and nitrogen dioxide ( NO2 ) ] in urban street may be describe by only two reaction : the reaction between ozone ( O3 ) and NO forming NO2 , and the photo dissociation of NO2:26 NO þ O3 ! NO2 ð1Þ NO2 þ hn ! NO þ Oð3 PÞ  O 3 P þ O2 ! O3 ð2Þ ð3Þ O ( 3P ) be ground state atomic oxygen . Reaction ( 3 ) be very fast , and for most practical application it may be disregard . The product of reaction ( 2 ) may thus be consider to be NO and O3 . NOx be therefore mainly emit as NO and to a lesser extent , NO2 . Urban Air Pollution Climates throughout the World 9 Long-term exposure to elevate NO2 level may decrease lung function and increase the risk of respiratory symptom such as acute bronchitis , cough and phlegm , particularly in children,27 whereas NO at current ambient air concentration be consider to be harmless . Previously , the fraction of NOx directly emit as NO2 be only about 5 to 10 % in country with a small fraction of diesel engine . Due to the use of catalytic converter and an increase number of diesel engine with high fraction of NO2 in the exhaust , this value may in some region be up to as much as 40 % .28 This extremely simple chemical mechanism of two reaction and a direct emission describe very well the concentration of NO2 inside urban streets,26 and e.g . for Northern European city it may also be apply for describe NO2 concentration in urban background air.5 The use of catalytic converter have in recent year lead to a signiﬁcant reduction in NOx concentration in urban street of many industrialised country . However , for several reason NO2 level have not follow the same trend ( Figure 4 ) . Part of the explanation be the chemical conversion of NO to NO2 in the reaction with O3 , but another explanation be an increased fraction of NO2 in the NOx emission from vehicle with catalytic converter . Despite the overall reduction in NOx emission this be contribute to elevate NO2 concentration . Prognoses for the development in NO2 concentration in Denmark indicate that the future exhaust standard for road traﬃc vehicle will solve the current problem of comply with EU limit value . It be therefore important that similar emission restriction take place in develop country in the future in order to solve the problem of exposure of the population to elevate NO2 level here also . 6 Particle Pollution in Urban Areas Ambient urban air contain a complex mixture of particle of vary size and chemical composition.29–33 The size be crucial for the atmospheric fate34 as well as the human health impact , since it govern the particle ’ atmospheric behaviour as well as their deposition in the human respiratory system.35 Particles in ambient air typically appear in three rather distinct size class ( or mode ) usually term ultraﬁne ( diameter : 0.01–0.1 mm or 10–100 nm ) , ﬁne ( diameter : 0.l–2.5 mm ) and coarse ( diameter : 42.5 mm ) mode particle ( Figure 5 ) . 6.1 Particle Mass Concentrations Only the mass concentration of particle o10 mm in aerodynamic diameter ( PM10 ) be generally use as an indicator for suspended particulate matter ( e.g . regulate in EU directive ) and routinely measure at many location throughout the world . Particle mass be dominate by particle 40.1 mm in diameter . The particle that appear in traﬃc exhaust be find mainly in the ultraﬁne fraction and include elemental carbon ( EC ) as well as organic carbon ( OC ) .36 These particle contribute considerably to the PM number 10 Ole Hertel and Goodsite Jagtvej , Copenhagen Banegaarsgade , Aarhus Vesterbro , Aalborg H.C.A . Boulevard , Cph Albanigade , Odense 300 µg ( NO2 ) /m3 250 200 150 100 50 98 00 02 04 98 00 02 04 96 94 92 90 88 86 84 82 0 70 60 µg ( NO2 ) /m3 50 40 30 20 10 Figure 4 96 94 92 90 88 86 84 82 0 The measure trend in annual mean concentration of NOx and NO2 [ both show in mg ( NO2 ) /m3 ] at the street station in the largest Danish city : Copenhagen , Aarhus , Odense and Aalborg . Upper plot show NOx and lower plot the NO2 . The plot include measurement from the time period 1982 to 2005 , and illustrate the decrease in NO concentration that result from increase number of vehicle with catalytic converter in the Danish car park , but also that this decrease be not reﬂected in the NO2 concentration that have remain more or less constant during this time period.63 concentration but only little to the PM mass . There be health study that show relationship between both acute and long-term health eﬀects and ultraﬁne particle ( particle size o0.1 mm ) ,37 but other study be less conclusive concern health eﬀects of ultraﬁne particle ( express as particle number concentration ) . Although ultraﬁne particle give a minor contribution to mass concentration , they represent most of the particle in term of number concentration . Most study of health eﬀects of ambient air particle have be relate to particle mass , but even here the mechanism be not fully understood and the need for more study have be underlined.38 11 Urban Air Pollution Climates throughout the World Number Mass Condensates & other primary particle ( mainly traffic ) Secondary particle ( long range transport ) Soot ( traffic ) 0.001 0.01 0.1 coarse ( wear of tire , road construction work & natural source ) Dust from brake ( traffic ) 1 10 100 µm Nano particle Ultrafine particle PM2.5 ( fine particle ) PM10 Figure 5 The typical size distribution of particle in urban air give in both mass and number concentration . The horizontal axis be the particle diameter in mm . The full line be mass distribution , dominate by the coarse and secondary particle . The dashed line be the number distribution , dominate by ultraﬁne particle . Note that one particle with a diameter of 10 mm have the same weight as 1 billion particle with a diameter of 0.01 mm.64 In busy street , a signiﬁcant fraction of the particle pollution originate from traﬃc.39 The direct emission from car exhaust contain particle form inside the engine as well as in the air just after the exhaust pipe . The latter depend on the sulfur content in the fuel ; study have show that reduce the sulfur content in diesel signiﬁcantly reduce the particle number concentration in urban street . The directly emit particle be find mainly in the ultraﬁne particle fraction . However , traﬃc also contribute to mechanically formed particle in the ﬁne and especially the coarse fraction . The particle in the coarse fraction be produce from wear of tyre and road surface material as well as re-suspended dust . The particle from the brake contribute similar amount to the ﬁne and the coarse fraction . For particle mass ( PM10 ) , long-range transport be usually the dominating source for regional background level . Danish study have show that less than 10 % of the urban PM10 originate from local urban sources.39 For particle number as well as NOx a much larger diﬀerence between rural , urban and curb side level be observe , indicate a large contribution from local traﬃc source ( Figure 6 ) . 6.2 Particle Number Concentrations A striking feature of urban particle be the often very high correlation between concentration of NOx and total particle number , indicate that both 12 Concentration relative to urban background ( =100 ) Ole Hertel and Goodsite 600 500 400 Curb side urban background near-city location rural background 300 200 100 80 60 40 20 0 ToN Figure 6 PM10 NOx Comparison of average concentration of total particle number ( ToN ) , particle mass ( PM10 ) and NOx at rural , near-city , urban and curb side station relative to urban background level in the Copenhagen area . The concentration bar be stack so that only the additional contribution be mark with the pattern show in the legend . Note that the scale of the vertical axis change at 100 . Adapted from Ketzel et al.39 compound originate from the same ( traﬃc ) source ( one study39 find R 40.9 ) . They be emit in a similar ratio ( particle number : NOx ) from the diﬀerent traﬃc category , i.e . high NOx emitter ( diesel vehicle , especially heavy-duty vehicle ) be also high particle emitter ( when these be express in particle number concentration ) .40 Model calculation such as those with the Danish Operational Street Pollution Model ( OSPM ) 41 have be show to reproduce well the observed particle number , when treat particle as inert tracer ( disregard transformation and loss process ) .42 The particle emission factor depend on ambient temperature with higher emission at lower temperature , which be account for in the simulations.43 Long-range transport contribute signiﬁcantly to ﬁne fraction particle and lead to the main part of particulate sulfate and ammonium and a large part of particulate nitrate . These secondary particle be form from anthropogenic sulfur dioxide ( SO2 ) , ammonia ( NH3 ) and NOx emissions,44 and often constitute more than 30 % of the PM10 . Another part of the particulate nitrate appear in the coarse fraction , which also contain contribution from sea spray and re-suspended dust ( include road dust ) 45,46 that have a relatively large mass and quickly deposit by gravitational settling . Coarse particle , therefore , have a short lifetime in the atmosphere compare with ﬁne particle . Combustion in wood stove be a source of particle pollution , which contribute about 90 % of the total particle emission attribute to domestic heating in Denmark . As an example , road traﬃc and use of wood stove be the largest Danish source of Urban Air Pollution Climates throughout the World 13 particle exposure of the population , due to the low release height and because the emission take place where people live . The particle emit from wood stove combustion be soot particle with high content of polycyclic aromatic hydrocarbon ( PAH ) . 6.3 Importance of Measurement Location People in temperate climate spend a signiﬁcant part of their time indoors . Exposure to air pollution in the home be thus an important fraction of their overall exposure . A Danish study in an uninhabited apartment in central Copenhagen reveal that particle pollution inside the apartment be to some extent link to the activity level of the neighbouring apartments.47 This indicate that source in the neighbouring environment must also be consider in the analysis of overall exposure . When compare and analyse observed level of PM in diﬀerent city one must take into account that the location of the monitoring station may be very diﬀerent , and there be a risk of compare site in the vicinity of large pollution source with site at some distance from local source . 6.4 Contribution from Natural Processes Data collect in a WHO study ( Figure 7 ) , indicate that PM10 concentration in Asia and Latin America be higher than be observe in Europe and North America.1 The highest particle level be observe in Asia and be attribute to forest ﬁres , poor fuel quality and aeolian ( windblown ) dust . Wind erosion originate especially in the desert of Mongolia and China contributes to the general level of PM in the region . 7 Polycyclic Aromatic Hydrocarbons ( PAH ) in Urban Areas 7.1 Sources and Emissions Polycyclic aromatic hydrocarbon be a group of chemical that be form during incomplete burning of coal , oil , gas , wood , garbage , or other organic substance , such as tobacco and charbroiled meat . There be more than 100 diﬀerent PAHs . PAHs generally occur as complex mixture ( i.e . as part of combustion product such as soot ) , not as single compound . They usually occur adventitiously , but they can be manufacture as individual compound for research purpose ; however , not as the mixture find in combustion product . They can also be find in material such as crude oil , coal , coal tar pitch , creosote , and rooﬁng tar . A few PAHs be use in medicine and in the production of dye , plastic , and pesticide . Others be contain in asphalt use in road construction . Given the numerous source of emission of combustion product in urban ( especially in develop country ) area , PAHs be generally consider Figure 7 0 40 80 120 160 200 240 Latin America Africa Interim target-2 Europe Interim target-3 Annual average PM10 concentration in selected city worldwide Interim target-1 Air Quality Guidelines PM10 concentration ( mg m3 ) in select large city throughout the world . The plot have be derive on basis of WHO ( 2006 ) .1 The WHO Air Quality Guideline ( AQG ) [ show in the ﬁgure ] deﬁned at the lowest level at which total , cardiopulmonary and lung cancer mortality have be show to increase with more than 95 % conﬁdence in response to long-term exposure . Shown also be the WHO interim target value 1 to 3 . Latin A Asia Karachi New Delhi Katmandu Dhaka Calcuta Shanghai Beijing Gangzhou Ho Chi Min City Mumbai Colombo Busan Seoul Manila Bangkok Taipei Hong Kong Tokyo Lima Arequipa Meddelin Fortaleza Santiago Bogotá Cochabamba San Salvador Guatemala City Havana Mexico City Quito Rio de Janeiro La Paz Sáo Paulo San Juan Belo Horizonte Cairo Vereeniging Johannesburg Cape Town Praque Turin Bucharest Barcelona Milan Rome Cracow Berlin Erfurt Oslo Palermo Seville Bologna Helsinki Budapest Florence Hamburg Vienna Warsaw Munich Amsterdam Cologne Geneva Basel Zurich Copenhagen London Athens Leeds Brussels Stockholm San Diego St. Louis Los Angeles Knoxville Houston Pittburg Dallas Memphis Oklahoma City Washington DC New York Seattle 14 Ole Hertel and Goodsite Urban Air Pollution Climates throughout the World 15 ubiquitous in the atmospheric environment and the urban environment in general . They occur in air , either attach to dust particle or as solid in airborne soil or sediment . PAHs be also a common product of combustion from common source such as motor vehicle , and other gas-burning engine , woodburning stove and furnace , cigarette smoke , industrial smoke or soot , and charcoal-broiled foods.48,49 This be of great concern due to the mutagenic50 and carcinogenic51 property of PAHs . PAHs of three or more benzene ring have a low vapour pressure and low solubility in water . Therefore they be present in ambient air both as gaseous compound and as material adsorb on particle . Lighter PAHs be accordingly almost always observe in gas phase , whereas heavier PAHs be generally observe on particle . The United States Agency for Toxic Substances ( ATSDR , 1995 ) have list 17 PAHs as of priority concern with respect to their toxicological proﬁle . PAHs have be study in urban and other area and appear to represent a fraction of a percent of the ambient particle mass.52 However , there be compel argument that the previously commonly employed measurement technique produce artefact and despite their toxicological proﬁle , no country have mandatory guideline with respect to ambient air quality standards.53 The reader be refer to a recent review paper for greater detail and the current state of the art.53 Commercial production have be find not to be a signiﬁcant source of PAHs in the environment.54 The primary source of many PAHs in ambient air be the incomplete combustion of wood and other fuels.55 Natural source include volcano , forest ﬁres , crude oil , and shale oil . Only three of the 7 PAHs include in the ATSDR proﬁles be produce commercially in the United States in quantity greater than research level : acenaphthene , acenaphthylene , and anthracene.49 Studies should be conduct to see if commercial production ( account for a product ’ total life cycle ) be a signiﬁcant source of PAHs to the urban environment . 7.2 Sampling Artefacts In order to reduce the risk of sample artefacts,52 in the spring of 2003 the Mexico City Metropolitan Area ( MCMA ) campaign employ three independent method to measure particle-bound PAHs.56,57 They find peak concentration of PAHs on the order of 120 ng m3 during the morning rush hour . Accordingly in urban area , depend on the fuel source of the vehicle and the use of catalytic converter , motor vehicle traﬃc be a signiﬁcant source of PAHs with the balance of the remainder from trash and biomass burning . As an example , one speciﬁc study find that 20 % of the vehicle be account for 50 % of the PAH emissions.58 Like other atmospheric gaseous and particulate constituent , PAHs be remove from the atmosphere by wet or dry deposition and may also be convert or degrade in heterogeneous process . A very rapid decay of surface PAHs in the morning photochemistry have be reported.52 However , in this study , it could not be rule out that surfactant coat the particle may have aﬀected the sensitivity of the applied instrument . This be another example of the complexity of PAH measurement . 16 Ole Hertel and Goodsite There may be signiﬁcant concentration of very toxic and very reactive PAHs in the MCMA atmosphere that be miss due to ﬁlter reaction artefacts.57 7.3 Long Range Transport Long range transport of PAHs be a concern . PAHs be designate as one of the persistent toxic substance in central and northeast Asia under the Stockholm Convention ( UNEP , 2002 ) . It have be demonstrate that transformation process can lead to PAHs which be more toxic than their precursors.56 Processes describe the transformation and fate of PAHs in the urban environment be need to further quantify the magnitude of the health risk associate with this toxic pollutant source . One study have analyse the source apportionment of particulate PAHs at Seoul , Korea , during a measurement campaign between August 2002 and December 2003,59 by apply the US EPA ( 2004 ) chemical mass balance ( CMB ) model ; as Seoul be in the atmospheric footprint of major coal burn industry and power plant of both China and Japan , as well as contribute itself to the Northeast Asia particle footprint . In Seoul , similar to MCMA , gasoline and diesel vehicle account for 31 % of the measured PAHs , i.e . the major source . Daily and seasonal variation be note and attribute to diﬀerences in biomass burning and coal ( heat ) with a 19 % diﬀerence in the total concentration observe between fall ( 63 % ) and winter ( 82 % ) . The source have an inverse proﬁle away from the city , which the author attribute via source analysis to long range transport of atmospheric pollutant ( LRTAP ) PAHs and their precursor from source in China or North Korea . 7.4 Future Requirements The Korean study , as well as the other study discuss above , document the urgent need for better understanding of PAHs in the urban atmosphere as well as their transformation , transport and conversion . Although air quality of mega-cities and urban area fall within the jurisdiction of local government , the study provide compel evidence that eﬀorts at international level to regulate LRTAP must speciﬁcally look at PAHs and their precursor . This will require an international , strategic joint eﬀort amongst Asia , Europe and North America to investigate these complicate mechanism , and analyse the data . There be often many air quality monitoring station ( 198 in Korea ) in country collect data , but for PAHs , they be not well establish , and level be report in only a few study , and these be usually from campaign that predate the publication by year , owe to the complexity of analyse the data . 8 Trace Elements , include Heavy Metals in Urban Areas Trace elements include heavy metal ( HM ) be ubiquitous in the atmosphere of urban area and many be classiﬁed as Hazardous Air Pollutants ( HAP ) . Urban Air Pollution Climates throughout the World 17 They represent serious environmental and health risk and be especially of concern in industrial and urban climate , with mega-cities in develop nation be the obvious site of concern for population at risk for trace element exposure . One study have provide trend and level of trace metal in three Danish city as well as at background sites.60 The level report be less than literature value for mega-cities , as expect , but in many case the trend be similar . More study need to be accomplish with respect to trend in develop and mega-cities . 8.1 Heavy Metals Western nation have tighten and continue to restrict emission of such trace element as mercury , but despite decade of history of eﬀorts to regulate trace metal they still represent a real and press health and environmental hazard in the US ( US EPA , 2006 ) and certainly in other western nation and other country as well . Humans be expose to metal via ambient air inhalation , and consume contaminate food or water , as well as , in the case of lead and child , chew on lead paint toy , and exposure from wall or furniture . Several metal aside from mercury and lead be classiﬁed by the United States Clean Air Act as HAPs : chromium , manganese , nickel , and cadmium . The United States Environmental Protection Agency ( US EPA ) list many trace metal as among the worst urban air toxics ( www.epa.gov/ttn/atw/nata/ 34poll.html , 28 November , 2008 ) . 8.2 Trace Elements Trace element and metal be of great concern in western city prior to lead be ban as an anti-knock agent in gasoline in the mid 70s , as well as other regulation regard the use of lead in , for example , house paint . The observed high level and eﬀects have lead to extensive monitoring with consequential regulation and international agreement that have greatly reduce the concentration . The source of emission into the urban atmosphere of commonly measure trace element : Be , Co , Hg , Mo , Ni , Sb , Se , Sn , and V , with smaller concentration of As , Cr , Cu , Mn , and Zn , be primarily human activity , especially the combustion of fossil fuel and biomass , industrial process and waste incineration.61 Certain trace element have signiﬁcant natural source such as : from sea spray near coastline , dust from aeolian process and weathering , especially note in Asia , and volcano with local , regional and global eﬀects . On any give day however , the main source of trace element in urban environment will be through anthropogenic activity , and national regulation , especially with regard to limit in gasoline , and emission from coal ﬁred power plant , as well as industrial , especially metallurgic and ( in the case of mercury ) 18 Ole Hertel and Goodsite chlor-alkali process , mean that develop nation have higher level in general than western nation in their urban environment . Trace metal have be measure in nearly all aerosol size fraction . It be therefore of paramount importance to characterize the particle size distribution and relate these to the potential adverse health eﬀects in the urban population.61 As with PAHs , there be seasonal variation of trace metal in PM10 and PM2.5 observe in campaign conduct seasonally , with higher winter value of nearly all trace element suggest a signiﬁcant source of particle from domestic heating in most temperate urban area , and/or less eﬃcient dispersion of emission in winter . 8.3 Recommendations for Modelling A regional model for atmospheric photochemistry and particulate matter be apply to predict the fate and transport of ﬁve trace metal ; lead , manganese , total chromium , nickel , and cadmium , over the continental United States during January and July 2001.62 This study may be use to summarize the state of the art of the modelling of trace metal and the limitation of trace metal inventory . The author recommend research in order to improve the model result on emission data for aerial suspension of particle and biomass burning . They note that include these source will require model of aerial suspension and combustion as well as composition data for fuel and soil over the modelled location . Their recommendation will enable better modelling of especially lead and manganese . They recommend further research to better quantify anthropogenic emission of chromium , nickel and cadmium [ in the US National Emission Inventory ( NEI ) ] . It be our opinion that their recommendation be valid for most NEI . 9 Conclusions Urban air pollution be a complex and dynamic mixture of gaseous and particulate pollutant with both daily and seasonal variation due to both anthropogenic activity level and weather condition . The highest urban air pollutant concentration of some of the most studied pollutant like PM10 and SO2 be find be Africa , Asia and Latin America . The highest level of photochemical pollutant like O3 and NO2 be observe in Latin America and some of the developed country . The negative health eﬀects of urban air pollution be well document and find to be particularly severe in the mega-cities , where quality of life be lessen due to air pollution and the possibility of reduced productivity from toxics should be investigated.4 The actual pollution load in a give urban area be the result of both local emission and transport from both nearby and more remote source . The location of the city be very important for the local dispersion condition , which be govern by meteorology but be also heavily aﬀected by topographical condition ( e.g . eﬀects of coastline , Urban Air Pollution Climates throughout the World 19 mountain , valley etc. ) . Studies of the impact of local harbour and airport have generally point at a limited inﬂuence on urban air quality , and that the impact be mainly relate to the road traﬃc that these facility be generate . Although the health eﬀects of urban air pollution have be document in numerous study , there be still major unknown in this regard . This review point at an urgent need for ﬁeld study dedicate to a better characterisation of urban particle pollution together with study focus at gaseous and particulate PAHs and trace element such as heavy metal . Such study be need for the full assessment of the health impact on the urban population and for provide the necessary basis for future urban air pollution management . In this chapter we have not address the synergistic impact on human health of the chemical cocktail arise from diverse source in the various micro-environments where the population reside in daily life . The negative health eﬀects of air pollution may be enhance by exposure to environmental tobacco smoking , indoor source like cooking , candle , stove etc . but also by exposure to non-airborne agent in textile , food etc . For this complex interaction of diﬀerent exposure and their impact on human health , the reader be refer to the literature . Lett. , 2008 , 6 , 95–100 . 62 . W. T. Hutzell and D. J. Luecken , Sci . Total Environ. , 2008 , 396 , 164–179 . 63 . O. Hertel , T. Ellermann , F. Palmgren , R. Berkowicz , P. Løfstrøm , L. M. Frohn , C. Geels , C. A. Skjøth , J. Brandt , J. Christensen , K. Kemp and M. Ketzel , Environ . Chem . 2007 , 4 , 65–74 . 64 . O. Hertel , S. S. Jensen , M. Hvidberg , M. Ketzel , R. Berkowicz , F. Palmgren , P. Wåhlin , M. Glasius , S. Loft , P. Vinzents , O. RaaschouNielsen , M. Sørensen and H. Bak , in Assessing the Impact of Traﬃc Air Pollution on Human Exposures and Linking Exposures to Health Eﬀects Traﬃc , Road Pricing and the Environment , ed . C. Jensen-Butler , B. Madsen , O.A . Nielsen and B. Sloth , Springer Press , 2007 . View publication stats 